[Amit Varma]: Hemapathi Sen was born in 1866 in Khulna, then a small village in eastern Bengal.
[Amit Varma]: When she was nine years old, she was married off to a 45-year-old widower.
[Amit Varma]: During the days, she would play with dolls with her husband's children.
[Amit Varma]: At night, she would lie on her bed, paralysed in fear, unable to process what was happening,
[Amit Varma]: waking up naked without understanding why.
[Amit Varma]: Three years into her marriage, her husband died.
[Amit Varma]: Soon, her mother-in-law died, and her mother died, and her father died.
[Amit Varma]: At the age of 12, she was an orphan and a widow, abandoned by the family that remained,
[Amit Varma]: penniless in this poor village in the middle of the 19th century.
[Amit Varma]: You'd think that there wasn't much left in life for her.
[Amit Varma]: But this 12-year-old girl left the small village, made her way in the world, educated herself,
[Amit Varma]: became a doctor, an actual doctor in an age where female doctors were rare, when women
[Amit Varma]: were not supposed to study.
[Amit Varma]: She even got a gold medal in a medical college, but the boys protested, saying girls are not
[Amit Varma]: supposed to be studying in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: They threatened to kill her.
[Amit Varma]: She didn't get the medal.
[Amit Varma]: Later in life, she fought for equal pay for female doctors and became a prominent social
[Amit Varma]: figure.
[Amit Varma]: She also wrote a book.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for years, she sat down and wrote.
[Amit Varma]: And when she died in 1933, those pages disappeared into a trunk.
[Amit Varma]: They lay at the bottom of that trunk for 80 years, till they were discovered.
[Amit Varma]: And even then, her descendants thought, what's the big deal about this book?
[Amit Varma]: But that book was a big deal.
[Amit Varma]: It got published.
[Amit Varma]: And so we now know the story of Hemabati Sen.
[Unknown]: What a life.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Kavita Rao, who has just written this powerful book called Lady Doctors,
[Amit Varma]: The Untold Stories of India's First Women in Medicine.
[Amit Varma]: This book profiles six pioneering women who fought all odds to become doctors in an age
[Amit Varma]: when girls were supposed to sit at home and learn cooking and needlework, and faced misogyny
[Amit Varma]: and violence if they dared to enter the man's world.
[Amit Varma]: These include Hemabati Sen, who I mentioned in the introduction to this episode, and the
[Amit Varma]: other women are just as remarkable.
[Amit Varma]: In one sense, this book chronicles how women were second-class citizens in 19th century
[Amit Varma]: India, sometimes treated worse than cattle.
[Amit Varma]: In other ways, it is a reflection of our society even today.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the customs of getting girls married off when they are nine may no longer be common.
[Amit Varma]: But women are still thought of as a property of men, as instrumental to the well-being
[Amit Varma]: of others, without autonomy of their own.
[Amit Varma]: I often say that the India of today inhabits multiple centuries, the 19th, the 20th, and
[Amit Varma]: some of us elites in the 21st.
[Amit Varma]: So there is a lot in this book that is familiar, ugly undercurrents today that were explicit
[Amit Varma]: then, that are almost hardwired into our society, that go back a long way and still remain with
[Amit Varma]: us.
[Amit Varma]: My conversation with Kavita wasn't just about these lady doctors though, or the society
[Amit Varma]: of then and now.
[Amit Varma]: Kavita is a wonderful writer and storyteller, and we also spent a lot of time talking about
[Amit Varma]: her craft, the life of a writer in these times, and the possibilities of being a late bloomer.
[Amit Varma]: She also had some terrific advice for women trying to juggle family and writing.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Over the last few months, I've enjoyed teaching my online course, The Art of Clear Writing,
[Amit Varma]: and an online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction that offers much stimulation, and even some comfort in these difficult times.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, and a lovely and lively community at the end
[Amit Varma]: of it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs Rs. 10,000 plus GST, or about $150, and the August classes begin on the
[Amit Varma]: 7th of August.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God-given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I'd like to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Kavita, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for having me.
[Amit Varma]: I loved reading your book, Lady Doctors.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, it's really interesting that, you know, one of the things that I noticed about
[Amit Varma]: your book is that on the one hand, it tells you how bad things used to be for women once
[Amit Varma]: upon a time.
[Amit Varma]: But then you realize with a start that in many cases, they are still like that for most
[Amit Varma]: women.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, I find that it's not just a sort of a historical book, but has many resonances
[Amit Varma]: with current times.
[Amit Varma]: But we'll discuss that a little later in this episode, I want to begin by sort of asking
[Amit Varma]: you about your journey so far.
[Amit Varma]: You know, tell me a little bit about what your childhood was like, where you grew up,
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Guest]: So basically, I've been an expatriate all my life.
[Guest]: I mean, since the age of four, I was born in Mangalore, but my father was a pediatrician.
[Guest]: So when I was about two or three, we moved to the UK because he had a fellowship there.
[Guest]: Then after a couple of years, we moved back.
[Guest]: We were in Bangalore for a bit, and then around then this was a very long time ago, in 1975
[Guest]: or so, my father was one of the pediatricians sent to Iran.
[Guest]: This was pre-revolution Iran by Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: She sent a convoy of doctors to help Iran because in those days, India and Iran were
[Guest]: on very good terms.
[Guest]: And around 1975, I moved, you know, with my family to Iran, did not live in big towns.
[Guest]: We lived in small towns, we did not live in Tehran, and we lived there for about four
[Guest]: years.
[Guest]: We had to quickly leave when the revolution came, when the Khomeini came in.
[Guest]: And then we returned to Bangalore again.
[Guest]: And after a few years, my dad again got itchy feet, and we moved to Bahrain.
[Guest]: And I spent, I guess you could say I spent most of my early childhood there because we
[Guest]: stayed there for about eight years, then again returned to Bangalore.
[Guest]: And I did my, you know, schooling and I went to law school in Bangalore.
[Guest]: So that's me up to that point.
[Guest]: That was my childhood.
[Amit Varma]: So you've written a really nice piece that I'll link from the show notes on your childhood
[Amit Varma]: in Iran, where you talk about how when you went there, there was a snowstorm, your roof
[Amit Varma]: had collapsed.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about how it was to be kid in all these different places, like first
[Amit Varma]: you're in Iran, then you're in Bahrain.
[Amit Varma]: And you've essentially, as we'll discuss, kind of been traveling all your life.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what kind of books did you read?
[Amit Varma]: Was there a sort of an early desire to be a writer and so on?
[Guest]: Yes, I mean, it's true that I've been traveling all my life, like my father was a Rolling
[Guest]: Stone then and the man I married, when I married him, he deceptively said, I'm going to stay
[Guest]: in one place.
[Guest]: And then he too started rolling.
[Guest]: So, you know, we have moved around a lot.
[Guest]: That's been my life for better or for worse.
[Guest]: So Iran, to be perfectly honest, I have very few memories because I was four years old
[Guest]: at that time.
[Guest]: But, you know, through photos and, you know, talking with my mom, I've reconstructed a
[Guest]: lot of memories.
[Guest]: And you asked about what I read, I mean, right from the time I was small, I was reading.
[Guest]: And one of the reasons for that was until I was in Iran, we didn't have a proper school
[Guest]: because there were not enough people or not enough children to have a proper school there
[Guest]: because we were in small towns like Kermanshah and Zahedan.
[Guest]: So my school basically had five kids.
[Guest]: And of these five children, one of them was my older sister.
[Guest]: So the other four kids were not related to me.
[Guest]: But we had an American teacher who really encouraged us to read, and I mean, I should
[Guest]: say my father was not like many Indian fathers, I suppose.
[Guest]: He was all about reading.
[Guest]: He used to get us a lot of books and he didn't have a lot of money at that time because he
[Guest]: was a young doctor in Iran, so, you know, he wasn't getting paid much.
[Guest]: But he used to get us secondhand books or books from some sort of library, whatever.
[Guest]: And he used to constantly encourage us to read.
[Guest]: And I suppose the books I read were, you know, initially were the kind of books that most
[Guest]: children in India might possibly be reading.
[Guest]: Inid Blyton, though she is not popular these days, but I read her, Roald Dahl and, you
[Guest]: know, the Just William books, those ones, those were available.
[Guest]: Of Indian books, I think mostly the Soviet books, you know, the books that were cheaply
[Guest]: available which we used to pick up on our trips to India, you know, all the Soviet books.
[Guest]: So, you know, he used to encourage me to read virtually everything and a lot of history
[Guest]: books as well.
[Guest]: You know, not just fiction, but, you know, a lot of history books as well as I got older.
[Guest]: So in that way, I was extremely lucky.
[Guest]: You know, my parents were not like many other Indian parents.
[Guest]: They were not just about the studies and getting marks and being good at maths and stuff like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And I was terrible at maths and I'm always been terrible at maths anyway.
[Guest]: So, you know, I was happy to escape to reading.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I missed something.
[Guest]: You said about my memories of Bahrain, which are much clearer.
[Guest]: I mean, I moved to Bahrain when I was about eight and it's a very small country.
[Guest]: And back then it was even smaller before the internet and before easy transport and, you
[Guest]: know, all that kind of thing.
[Guest]: And we had, I suppose, a very Indian life because I went to an Indian school.
[Guest]: I did not go to the posh international schools, parents couldn't afford that.
[Guest]: So I went to an Indian school, a CBSE school.
[Guest]: I didn't enjoy school at all, to be honest.
[Guest]: I didn't like that school.
[Guest]: I had to suffer it.
[Guest]: I honestly don't think that school taught me anything or very little.
[Guest]: I mean, basically all my teaching was at the hands of my father and my mother to a slightly
[Guest]: lesser extent because, you know, she had all the housework to be getting on with.
[Guest]: So really I feel like all my reading was due to my father and it was a very Indian lifestyle.
[Guest]: We met only other Indians and we went to an Indian school, we ate Indian food, we did
[Guest]: Indian things, we learned classical music.
[Guest]: And it's not the life that I later led as an expat.
[Guest]: It was very different to that.
[Guest]: In those days, Indians stuck to other Indians for the comfort of, you know, familiarity.
[Guest]: I don't really, I haven't followed that in my later life.
[Guest]: I mean, these days, I just, I do not want to hang out with other Indians for the sake
[Guest]: of familiarity.
[Guest]: I like to meet people from various different countries.
[Guest]: So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, that's interesting because in my years as a professional poker player, I
[Amit Varma]: would spend a lot of time in Macau where I would play a fair bit and I would of course
[Amit Varma]: go with other people from here.
[Amit Varma]: And on one such trip, they had this insane craving for Indian food.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm like, we are going back to India, why are you craving Indian food?
[Amit Varma]: So I remember one afternoon, we had to catch the ferry at Macau and go to Hong Kong and
[Amit Varma]: catch a flight back to India.
[Amit Varma]: And they said, before catching the ferry, let's have lunch at an Indian restaurant.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, what are you talking about, we will be there tonight, you know, you have
[Amit Varma]: dinner there.
[Amit Varma]: And they're like, no, let's go.
[Amit Varma]: And they insisted on going somewhere and we ended up missing the ferry because of which
[Guest]: we missed the flight.
[Guest]: Oh my goodness, that's a bit extreme, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And this insularity that Indians often have, that I understand the craving for familiarity,
[Amit Varma]: but the whole point of traveling is to kind of expand those horizons.
[Amit Varma]: So I just find it bewildering and bizarre.
[Amit Varma]: But I guess when people aren't traveling, traveling per se, but they're settled somewhere,
[Amit Varma]: I also understand that need for comfort.
[Amit Varma]: So in your article, there were a couple of very interesting quotes, one from your mom
[Amit Varma]: and one from your dad.
[Amit Varma]: So it's kind of interesting that, you know, one speaks to one's parents for quotes from
[Amit Varma]: a story.
[Amit Varma]: So I just want to read those quotes out and then I have a couple of unrelated questions
[Amit Varma]: around them.
[Amit Varma]: First, you quote your mom on how fashionable Iran was, pre-revolution Iran was, where she
[Amit Varma]: says, quote, I felt so unfashionable next to the Iranian woman with their lipstick,
[Amit Varma]: high heels and French perfume, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then later you quote your father talking about how things changed after revolution,
[Amit Varma]: where he says, quote, everything had changed.
[Amit Varma]: The streets were filled with young boys, only 15 or 16, toting machine guns.
[Amit Varma]: There were no women anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: One young boy branding a Kalashnikov came up to me and asked me what I thought of the
[Amit Varma]: change of guard.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think anyone, even Khomeini, had ever been so enthusiastic about the revolution
[Amit Varma]: as I was that day, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of my questions is about the exploration of memories, because I might have
[Amit Varma]: a few memories of my childhood.
[Amit Varma]: But I noticed a few months back, what I did was I kind of sat with my dad with a recorder
[Amit Varma]: and I just wanted him to talk about his memories and his growing up and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it was interesting.
[Amit Varma]: And when those memories kind of coincide with a time when I was alive and I also have memories,
[Amit Varma]: it was sort of interesting to sort of see them play off against each other.
[Amit Varma]: And this whole act of talking to people about what happened in the past, I wonder to what
[Amit Varma]: extent it changes one's impression of the past, not just in terms of the person asking,
[Amit Varma]: but even in terms of the person remembering.
[Amit Varma]: Like I did an episode with Anshul Malhotra and she wrote a beautiful book about the objects
[Amit Varma]: people carried with them from partition and the memories that those represented.
[Amit Varma]: And while researching for that, one of the sort of TIL moments for me was that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when we remember an event, the first time we remember it, we remember the event.
[Amit Varma]: But every subsequent time we remember the remembering.
[Amit Varma]: So memory is very malleable that way and can do strange things.
[Amit Varma]: So when you talk to people about your memories, like one, I wonder if you've done more of
[Amit Varma]: this spoken to your parents or others about memories of the past and you know, what is
[Amit Varma]: this sort of experience like, especially when in some small manner, you are also part of
[Amit Varma]: those memories?
[Guest]: Oh, I mean, this is a very complicated question.
[Guest]: One thing I noticed is that obviously, you know, when I speak to my mother about these
[Guest]: memories, at the time she was going through this journey in Iran, life was very difficult
[Guest]: for her.
[Guest]: You know, she grew up in a time when there was no internet and no easy access to books
[Guest]: and she was suddenly, you know, transported to a country where she didn't know anybody.
[Guest]: She didn't speak the language.
[Guest]: She, you know, she was just like a clunk down in there.
[Guest]: My father went off to work in his satisfying and interesting work as a pediatrician.
[Guest]: And she was stuck with two small kids.
[Guest]: I have an older sister who's just two years apart from me.
[Guest]: So there were two small kids under the age of, you know, five.
[Guest]: And she was sitting in, you know, looking after them running the house.
[Guest]: And I'm sure when she actually went through it, I mean, she says this, it was very hard
[Guest]: and very difficult, and she had many times when she totally missed her family and, you
[Guest]: know, and also, you know, in the early expatriates, they didn't have much money.
[Guest]: They don't lead the comfortable life that we later expatriates do.
[Guest]: They didn't have the internet.
[Guest]: I mean, they really suffered.
[Guest]: If you look at that picture, I mean, when you see that photo, it's like everybody is
[Guest]: slightly out of place, you know, there's my mom in her sari and, you know, all that.
[Guest]: But at the same time, now when she looks back upon it, she sees it as an enriching experience
[Guest]: because memories tend to become rosy with time.
[Guest]: And she sees it as, wow, it was such an interesting experience and had such a, you know, wonderful
[Guest]: time kind of doing that.
[Guest]: And as I said, pre-revolution, they were very good relations between the Iranians and the
[Guest]: Indians.
[Guest]: And when my mother got a lot of attention because she was wearing, you know, saris and,
[Guest]: you know, those 60s and 70s saris, chiffon saris, which are like sort of, you know, they're
[Guest]: quite sort of, you know, revealing and all that.
[Guest]: But there was no sort of blowback from that because in those days, all the Iranian women
[Guest]: were, you know, dressing in perfectly normal, as I say, normal in quotes way.
[Guest]: And then, of course, the revolution came and, you know, the revolution is a complicated
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: It's not like Reza Shah Pahlavi was such a wonderful person.
[Guest]: I mean, he was incredibly corrupt and, you know, was a tyrant and a dictator and all
[Guest]: those things.
[Guest]: So it's not as simple as, you know, good people were set aside for bad people and everything
[Guest]: became worse after that and all.
[Guest]: It's not that simple.
[Guest]: It can't be really be covered in a podcast and, you know, I don't want to comment on
[Guest]: that since I have not been back to Iran since then.
[Guest]: But just speaking from the memories of my parents and also when my father, as I say
[Guest]: in the article, my father had to go back to collect his salary, OK, and obviously that
[Guest]: was very important.
[Guest]: OK, so we quickly got out when the revolution came.
[Guest]: We got we got news from Tehran that Khomeini is coming and everybody needs to get out because
[Guest]: we have no idea what's going to happen.
[Guest]: You know, revolutionary guards are going to take over.
[Guest]: So we all got out on the first plane.
[Guest]: And then unfortunately, you know, we went to Mangalore, which is where my maternal grandmother
[Guest]: was and we were all sort of like refugees there.
[Guest]: We didn't have a house.
[Guest]: We didn't have anything.
[Guest]: We didn't have.
[Guest]: We left some stuff behind.
[Guest]: We just went with a few suitcases.
[Guest]: And then my father had to go back.
[Guest]: And while I don't remember this, my mother says like, you know, how scared she was, but
[Guest]: they had no choice because his money was with the government and he had to collect it.
[Guest]: So basically he flew back into a revolution, OK, and that was very scary for him.
[Guest]: And as I said, he described how all the streets were filled with 15 year olds with, you know,
[Guest]: Kalashnikovs or whatever gun they had back then.
[Guest]: And he just, you know, decided to put on this act of being very supportive of the revolution.
[Guest]: You know, basically he shouted the Iranian equivalent of Khomeini Zindabad and he was
[Guest]: very enthusiastic because, you know, he was like, I have to stay alive, get my money and
[Guest]: leave.
[Guest]: And on the way back, he had, there was no flight.
[Guest]: For some reason, there was no flight direct from Tehran to India.
[Guest]: Maybe they were stopped because of the revolution.
[Guest]: He had to go through Pakistan.
[Guest]: So I mean, you can just imagine at the time, I think General Zia-ul-Haq was in power.
[Guest]: So he was like, oh my God, what if, you know, I have to change planes in Pakistan?
[Guest]: What if they, you know, arrest me there?
[Guest]: At that time, relations between India and Pakistan were also really bad.
[Guest]: The wars were just over.
[Guest]: So he was like, I don't even know, I mean, he didn't say any of this, but my mother sat
[Guest]: and worried.
[Guest]: And again, remember, no mobile phones, no email, no internet, so no news at all.
[Guest]: She just had to sit and wait in Mangalore until he finally came back with his money.
[Guest]: And I think after that, she must have told him, I mean, no more of these kind of expatriate
[Guest]: assignments, which are, you know, ridiculously risky.
[Guest]: And I've been through my own journey in that regard.
[Guest]: But, you know, when I went through it, I thought about how worried she must have been when
[Guest]: the times when there was absolutely no communication and she just had to wait for him to come back.
[Guest]: The only communication was telegram, I think, at that time.
[Guest]: So yeah, I don't know whether that answers your question.
[Guest]: I may have wandered a bit.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, this is a show meant for wandering.
[Amit Varma]: And if I might wonder myself, a couple of modern resonances, you spoke about 15 years
[Amit Varma]: old with Kalashnikovs, which is basically what Twitter is like today, in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And you also spoke of your dad having to go all the way back to Iran to get his money.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written a book on freelancing.
[Amit Varma]: So I think many freelancers would also know how hard it is.
[Guest]: I don't think I have had it even a quarter as hard as my parents have had, you know,
[Guest]: have led their lives.
[Guest]: They had hard times.
[Guest]: So yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, just and just to continue that thought, I mean, there's also a sort of strain of choosing
[Amit Varma]: your memories, as it were, in your book, where you, for example, while you were speaking,
[Amit Varma]: I got reminded of Anandi Bai Joshi, you know, who went to the US to study and she's writing
[Amit Varma]: all these letters back to her husband.
[Amit Varma]: And her husband is both sort of has been good to her and bad to her, good to her that he
[Amit Varma]: sort of sent her to study and all of that and wanted her to be educated, bad to her
[Amit Varma]: in the sense he would just beat her up.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, once famously, as you said, he beat her up because she wasn't studying, she was
[Amit Varma]: cooking, which is a good reason, but the wrong action entirely, but we'll come to her later.
[Amit Varma]: But I thought of this in the context of just choosing the memories like you yourself pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that, you know, it's easy to look back at a particular point in time and say that,
[Amit Varma]: oh, the before was all good, and it was all rosy and the after was all bad.
[Amit Varma]: And while everything kind of contains multitudes, and this is also something I've been thinking
[Amit Varma]: about that, when we look back on the past, what we remember as a happy time or a sad
[Amit Varma]: time is really up to us, right, because we can choose those slivers of memories to remember
[Amit Varma]: and kind of, you know, discard the rest, and then it's up to us what we choose.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about after you've come back at this point in time, what's your
[Amit Varma]: conception of yourself forming up to be and I ask this because I find that and we are
[Amit Varma]: almost the same age, I think I might be a little younger, but we're almost the same
[Amit Varma]: age. And it kind of strikes me that, you know, people today can conceive of themselves as
[Amit Varma]: anything because everything is open to them through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, just in terms of the options you have open to you and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Now I remember back as an 80s kid, I mean, I'm too young to remember the 70s.
[Amit Varma]: So of course, I was around that.
[Amit Varma]: And as an 80s kid, you had all the traditional options open to you.
[Amit Varma]: And that's obviously for the boys, at least that, you know, doctor engineering and civil
[Amit Varma]: services or later, you know, MBA opens up in the 90s, all of that shit.
[Amit Varma]: But nothing really beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: What was your conception of yourself?
[Amit Varma]: And how did it evolve as time went by as you grew older and reached adulthood?
[Guest]: I mean, I returned from Bahrain to India in 1987.
[Guest]: And I was about 15 then.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I did my second PUC in Bangalore and my parents decided that they wanted to settle
[Guest]: in Bangalore for a while.
[Guest]: And you know, my father got a job there, set up his practice there and etc, etc.
[Guest]: My father had a very different concept of expat life than I do.
[Guest]: He was incredibly patriotic.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I'm not very patriotic at all.
[Guest]: So I almost believe that patriotism is the last refuge of the scoundrel.
[Guest]: He was an incredibly patriotic man and he had all these ideas about giving back to his
[Guest]: land of birth.
[Guest]: And I don't scoff at those ideas, mind you, I just, I don't feel the same way or quite
[Guest]: often I don't feel the same way or, you know, I have very muddled and mixed feelings probably.
[Guest]: So anyway, so that's the reason why we returned.
[Guest]: And when I came back to India, I felt like a complete misfit.
[Guest]: I mean, I can be frank here because I don't think I hope that any of my relatives or parents,
[Guest]: my mother is listening to this.
[Guest]: You know, I come from this very sort of tiny sort of Brahmin community, which is extremely
[Guest]: sort of stultifying and, you know, everybody gets married only within the tiny, tiny sub
[Guest]: sub sub-caste.
[Guest]: It's not even like, you know, we get married within the state or anything.
[Guest]: It's like very, very sort of, you know, basically originally from Udupi and everybody gets married
[Guest]: within that tiny, tiny sub sub-caste.
[Guest]: Everybody becomes a doctor or an engineer, though I have to say the women of my time,
[Guest]: you know, many of them didn't have any option to become anything, you know, that kind of
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: And when I came back, I felt completely suffocated.
[Guest]: I was like, oh, my God, this is hideous and I have to behave like this.
[Guest]: In those days, 1987, Bangalore was a small town.
[Guest]: It was not the Silicon Valley that it is today.
[Guest]: So everybody knew your business.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, everybody knew what you were doing, what you were wearing, what you
[Guest]: were.
[Guest]: That was especially true of my community.
[Guest]: So I felt incredibly suffocated for a while.
[Guest]: Then I just got used to it because there was no other option.
[Guest]: And then, you know, I studied at National Law School a little later on, and I wasn't
[Guest]: quite sure whether I wanted to study law, to be honest.
[Guest]: I mean, the other thing that I wanted to do was something in English literature, which
[Guest]: has always been my passion.
[Guest]: But my dad quite rightly said, and I think he was right, he said that that in an English
[Guest]: literature degree may not have much value in the job market if you want to get a job.
[Guest]: Probably law is a better idea.
[Guest]: And this was in the early years of NLSIU.
[Guest]: So I was the second batch very long time ago when NLSIU was new and it was honestly pretty
[Guest]: easy to get in.
[Guest]: It's not the incredibly difficult thing that it is today where you study for two years
[Guest]: and you still can't get in.
[Guest]: So I studied law for four years and I really enjoyed, sorry, five years.
[Guest]: And I really enjoyed studying law, but I didn't like practicing it so much, which I'll come
[Guest]: to later.
[Guest]: But I still have, you know, friends from my time in law school.
[Guest]: My best friends are still from law school.
[Guest]: When I was writing this book, Lady Doctors, I realized that some of the habits that I
[Guest]: had learned in law school came back to me.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And honestly, I had not used them for 20 years.
[Guest]: I had not used these skills of research and all that because law school was incredibly
[Guest]: grueling.
[Guest]: I mean, this was pre-internet, remember?
[Guest]: So 1989, 1990.
[Guest]: So pre-internet, we had to do something like, what was it?
[Guest]: Yeah, about 12 projects a year on various subjects.
[Guest]: And you know, each project was, I don't know, maybe about, you know, certainly about 5,000
[Guest]: words or more and well-researched at any way.
[Guest]: And we had to do all this without any internet.
[Guest]: So we had to go to the library and there will be one relevant book and all of us, 80 of
[Guest]: us will be jostling for that book.
[Guest]: And some people would even hide the book in the library so that somebody else couldn't
[Guest]: get it.
[Guest]: So all those habits of research and, you know, working hard on a long, long project and endurance
[Guest]: really helped me with this book.
[Guest]: So, you know, I'm glad I went to law school in some way, though I didn't actually use
[Guest]: my degree in a related way, but still, I'm glad I did that.
[Guest]: So does that sort of answer your question?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's useful to move ahead to the next question, which is what every good answer
[Amit Varma]: should do.
[Amit Varma]: So before we get to, you know, your practice against a lawyer and why you chose not to
[Amit Varma]: do that, elaborate a little bit more for me on the exact kind of research that you did
[Amit Varma]: in a couple of ways that one does, you know, I'm guessing, learning to practice a particular
[Amit Varma]: profession with these conventions for research and all, also then changes the way that you
[Amit Varma]: read, changes the way that you accumulate knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: And does that then shape the way that you think, like, do you begin to think about everything
[Amit Varma]: else in a different way, maybe a more systematic way, or maybe a different kind of systematic
[Amit Varma]: way?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a sort of an influence there?
[Amit Varma]: And also, what exactly was your research process for the book like, like, did you have any
[Amit Varma]: of the modern tools in terms of, you know, note taking and knowledge management for that?
[Amit Varma]: What was that process?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I'm very curious to know more.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I do think that yes, the, you know, the methods that I had in law school, you know,
[Guest]: we had these heavily footnoted projects, right?
[Guest]: I mean, though, I'm sure that, you know, plagiarism back then wasn't the, you know, hanging offence
[Guest]: it is right now, because, you know, we didn't have proper books, and we didn't have the
[Guest]: internet and etc.
[Guest]: So it was all sort of very rudimentary research.
[Guest]: Nevertheless, I think it really helped me because organising huge sets of material,
[Guest]: finding the right sources, all these skills helped me some 20 years later, as did my journalism
[Guest]: skills as well.
[Guest]: I mean, but, and for this book, I had to read a lot of very dry material.
[Guest]: And my aim in this book was not to just make it well researched and well footnoted and
[Guest]: all that.
[Guest]: My main aim in this book was to make it readable.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I have to see whether readers find it readable.
[Guest]: I won't know until I get some feedback from readers as to whether it is readable.
[Guest]: That was the main thing for me.
[Guest]: Take all this extremely dry jargon, some of it legal jargon, because there are a couple
[Guest]: of court cases also, and turn it into something interesting and readable and compelling.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I wanted it to read like fiction, while it is nonfiction.
[Guest]: I mean, I hope that that's sort of clear.
[Guest]: I mean, that I don't mean, you know, being inaccurate, but I wanted it to be a page turner
[Guest]: as far as I can possibly make it.
[Guest]: And I think all my legal writing really helped in that because, you know, basically in law,
[Guest]: you take a bunch of, you know, facts and try to boil them down to the essential fact, okay.
[Guest]: And that is what I've tried to do with this book.
[Guest]: So that really helped.
[Guest]: Regarding the research for this book, it's a very archival book, by which I mean that,
[Guest]: you know, I did want to talk to some of the relatives and the friends of the lady doctors,
[Guest]: but honestly, I couldn't find any that had, or I just found a couple maybe that had memories.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Mostly everybody else had forgotten about them.
[Guest]: They had no memories.
[Guest]: I mean, they knew that X person was their great grandmother or grandmother, but they
[Guest]: couldn't remember a thing about her because by the time they arrived, you know, they were
[Guest]: born or something, she was already really old.
[Guest]: And when you think about it, this is quite common because my paternal grandmother, for
[Guest]: instance, I have almost zero memories for her.
[Guest]: By the time I was born, she was very old in her nineties or whatever.
[Guest]: And she had dementia and she wasn't able to talk to me or anything like that.
[Guest]: So I mean, that's quite common if you ask me what memories I have of her, I don't have
[Guest]: any memories of her, to be honest.
[Guest]: This is quite common.
[Guest]: And so I had, when I say archival, I had to look at the letters of the lady doctors and
[Guest]: many of them didn't even write letters like Kadambini.
[Guest]: I had to look at some memoirs.
[Guest]: Some of them didn't write memoirs.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Then I went to memoirs, biographies of them written by other people.
[Guest]: They were a couple of those, though not many.
[Guest]: Some of them were in languages that I could not get easily translated.
[Guest]: So I had to do a lot of work to get an English translation because they were in Marathi or
[Guest]: they were in Bangla, you know, languages that I do not read.
[Guest]: So I had to look into all those things.
[Guest]: And eventually I even like for the last one, Mary Poonan Lukose, she started writing a
[Guest]: memoir and then just stopped abruptly, probably because she got married.
[Guest]: She had children.
[Guest]: This is always a thing with women.
[Guest]: I mean, with most of the lady doctors, suddenly they would stop keeping records when they
[Guest]: got married and had children because they were too busy looking after the children and,
[Guest]: you know, doing stuff.
[Guest]: So suddenly her memoir stopped and I was like, how do I find some record of what it was like
[Guest]: for her in Travancore?
[Guest]: And I had to go to the memoir of a person called Somerville, TH Somerville, who was
[Guest]: a doctor in Travancore.
[Guest]: He was a British missionary who was a doctor in Travancore and a friend of Mary's.
[Guest]: So I actually had to use his memoir to give an idea of what practicing medicine was like.
[Guest]: So obviously it's not the same experience that Mary had, but I didn't have a choice
[Guest]: because it was either that or leave like a big gap in the book where she comes back to
[Guest]: Kerala, gets married and then silenced for the next 40 years.
[Guest]: That couldn't have worked.
[Guest]: So I had to go to the memoirs of other people living at the same time that the lady doctors
[Guest]: were living.
[Guest]: So that was, you know, like as regarding modern tools and I'm not a very technically savvy
[Guest]: person, though I can learn stuff if I have to, you know, most of the material was still
[Guest]: from libraries, though maybe from digital archives and things like that.
[Guest]: And you know, I don't think I, I tried Scrivener for keeping notes and I just, I just couldn't
[Guest]: get along with it.
[Guest]: So I just resorted to the old fashioned methods that I perhaps learned in law school, which
[Guest]: is like, you know, I just kept detailed notes of everything.
[Guest]: And I made sure that I or I've, I've tried my best to make sure that everything is accurately
[Guest]: footnoted.
[Guest]: I don't want to sit up here and say I have done it perfectly in case a mistake comes
[Guest]: up to haunt me, but I've kind of, you know, tried my best.
[Guest]: You know, I obviously recorded all interviews and things like that.
[Guest]: So I don't think very modern methods, probably old fashioned methods.
[Amit Varma]: No, I have to say at this point that I love reading your book.
[Amit Varma]: For me, it wasn't a page turner, it was a page clicker, because even though you send
[Amit Varma]: me the physical book, I kind of prefer to just read it on my screen or I bought a Kindle
[Amit Varma]: version and just easier to take notes and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of questions regarding the actual writing of it.
[Amit Varma]: And one of those is that one of the qualities of your prose, which is also there in your
[Amit Varma]: journalism obviously, is the clarity of your prose, which is interesting coming from your
[Amit Varma]: legal backgrounds.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, I teach this online writing class and occasionally there'll be somebody
[Amit Varma]: there who will be like, I have a legal background and we are expected to write in this kind
[Amit Varma]: of language and these are the conventions and what do we do and all those other.
[Amit Varma]: Now it seems clear that you sort of confronted that and beat that it wasn't really an issue
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when I look back on my older writing, I always cringe, which I think happens to
[Amit Varma]: any good writer, you look back on something you wrote five years back, of course you cringe,
[Amit Varma]: because you're kind of growing and learning all the time, take me through, you know, your
[Amit Varma]: journey as far as your writing style is concerned, in terms of arriving at the kind of clarity
[Amit Varma]: which your book and your writing clearly has, because it's not something that is with anybody
[Amit Varma]: right from the start, you have to work at it.
[Amit Varma]: And initially, what happens is that there is this sort of dual thing playing out that
[Amit Varma]: there is a battle between judgment and ability.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, whenever a young writer will tell me that, you know, I'm such a crap writer,
[Amit Varma]: I should stop writing.
[Amit Varma]: I am like, No, you are not the fact that you're saying that means your judgment is better
[Amit Varma]: than your ability.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a great thing, because you just do more of it and your ability will catch
[Amit Varma]: up.
[Amit Varma]: While with me when I was young, I realized my judgment was also impaired because I actually
[Amit Varma]: thought I was a good writer.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that sort of journey with you like and how was it that you began to arrive
[Amit Varma]: at certain values of prose and was that sort of associated with your journey in journalism
[Guest]: as well?
[Guest]: I might answer this in great length, because this is a really interesting question and
[Guest]: one that I have grappled with for years.
[Guest]: And you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: When I graduated from law school, I had many skills, but I don't think the skill of good
[Guest]: writing was one of them, because obviously, legal writing is different from other writing.
[Guest]: And it was very convoluted.
[Guest]: I mean, if you have read all those judgments, and like, it's embarrassing, really.
[Guest]: So I used to write like that.
[Guest]: And my first writing job was as legal correspondent for the Economic Times.
[Guest]: This was a very long time ago, and I didn't do that job for long.
[Guest]: Nevertheless, it was, you know, a big learning experience for me.
[Guest]: And if I when I look at my clips back then, and I still have them, and they're all hard
[Guest]: copies, because in those days, there was no internet side, painstakingly cut them out
[Guest]: and send them to my parents, you know, and my writing was so rubbish back then.
[Guest]: So so bad.
[Guest]: And I really wonder why anybody didn't turn around and tell me maybe because everybody's
[Guest]: writing was quite bad back then.
[Guest]: Okay, because this was before the internet, and we didn't have access to the great writing
[Guest]: of, you know, the Americans and the British and you know, other people.
[Guest]: So my writing was just so convoluted.
[Guest]: I never used a short word when a long word would do and you know, and it was just so
[Guest]: I don't have words to describe it really.
[Guest]: And I think the process of writing, learning better was very slow.
[Guest]: Because what happened was, I mean, maybe we'll get this to this later.
[Guest]: Just a couple of years after my, you know, working for the Economic Times, I moved with
[Guest]: my husband to Hong Kong.
[Guest]: And suddenly I was exposed to all these journals that were there at the time, Far Eastern Economic
[Guest]: Review, Time Magazine, Asia Week, where, you know, people were writing in a completely
[Guest]: different style.
[Guest]: Okay, and I suddenly realized that, oh, wow, okay, this is what good writing is, you know,
[Guest]: you don't need to use big words to sound important.
[Guest]: That's not needed.
[Guest]: And I was like, wow.
[Guest]: And I actually did some work there for a magazine called Asia Week.
[Guest]: I was a correspondent for them.
[Guest]: And this was like really long ago.
[Guest]: And I had a mentor, a British man called Peter Cordingley.
[Guest]: And he told me, I want to see every sentence of yours no longer than 20 words.
[Guest]: And I was like, what do you mean?
[Guest]: By 20 words, I'm just getting started.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm not going to, I'm going to carry on for another 30 words at least.
[Guest]: And he's like, no, every sentence has to, Asia Week was part of Time at that time.
[Guest]: And they had a certain writing style, very punchy, every sentence no longer than 20 words.
[Guest]: And I just sort of slashed and burned through my writing, you know, under Peter's supervision.
[Guest]: And he was like, the other thing I have to say about, you know, working in Hong Kong
[Guest]: and Bangkok in those early years was, there was so much prejudice against Indians.
[Guest]: Like every job I interviewed for, they would say, huh, but we're actually looking for native
[Guest]: English speakers.
[Guest]: And I'm like, you know, I am a native English speaker, believe me, my Hindi is like not
[Guest]: worth reading.
[Guest]: And my Kannada is probably worse.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And they will be like, no, no, we're looking for native English speakers.
[Guest]: And then they would turn around and hire a French person or a Polish person or something.
[Guest]: So there was this incredible amount of racial prejudice and people were like, oh, we are
[Guest]: not going to hire you.
[Guest]: And that made me very angry and sad and I wept buckets and all that kind of thing.
[Guest]: And this was, you know, when my husband was forging ahead in his career, because you see
[Guest]: he works in finance and Indian people in finance is perfectly okay.
[Guest]: I mean, we won't, they can't write well, but they can, they're good with numbers, you know,
[Guest]: so it's okay.
[Guest]: And so I decided, you know, I can sit and cry or I can fix my writing and I can fix
[Guest]: what I can do.
[Guest]: I can't turn myself into a native English speaker, but I can do this much.
[Guest]: So I fixed it.
[Guest]: And it didn't happen overnight, obviously, I read, I read, I read and, you know, I looked
[Guest]: at good writing.
[Guest]: And I'm so glad these days that, you know, there's so many wonderful writers in India
[Guest]: these days whose prose is as good or sometimes better than, you know, British people or American
[Guest]: people or, you know, the so-called native English speakers, there are lots and lots
[Guest]: of them who are writing the most amazing nonfiction and very, very simply, and you had one of
[Guest]: them on your show, Samant Subramaniam, I'm a big fan.
[Guest]: So, you know, that kind of really simple and colourful writing, I'm still working on it.
[Guest]: I mean, it's an ongoing journey.
[Guest]: I'll keep learning, I hope.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And that wasn't a long answer at all.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what is this people go on for half an hour when they say they're going on a long
[Amit Varma]: answer.
[Amit Varma]: This is quite pithy.
[Amit Varma]: But I guess pithiness is one of the skills that you learned in your journalistic journey.
[Amit Varma]: The other sort of thing I loved about your book is that I noticed that every chapter
[Amit Varma]: of you know, from the introduction, and then the seven chapters in the epilogue, every
[Amit Varma]: chapter starts with something that really draws you in that you're telling a story,
[Amit Varma]: and there's something really telling there, and then it unfolds from there.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just structured so beautifully.
[Amit Varma]: And it's invisible.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I noticed it because you know, one notices these matters of craft.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought I was so well done because a really punchy start to the chapter and you
[Amit Varma]: want to know more about this person and what's going on.
[Amit Varma]: And there's so much drama, and then the whole thing kind of unveils.
[Amit Varma]: So at one level, obviously, as a journalist, also with every piece that you write, there
[Amit Varma]: is a structure, you're telling a story of sorts.
[Amit Varma]: But at the other level, you mentioned earlier that you wanted this book to be accessible
[Amit Varma]: a page turner or a page clicker as in my case.
[Amit Varma]: So what was sort of your models there in terms of writers who've tackled such interesting
[Amit Varma]: nonfiction subjects and managed to, you know, use the tools of fiction use the tools of
[Amit Varma]: literature, and you've of course, been a novelist before you've read you wrote a nonfiction
[Amit Varma]: book with your book, The Librarian.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, who were your kind of models there and how did your sort of ethic for approaching
[Guest]: something a project like this evolve?
[Guest]: So this is going to be another long answer, because it's a complicated question.
[Guest]: And I'm so glad you like the structure, because, you know, that's probably the nicest thing
[Guest]: anybody has ever said to me about any of my work, because I really thought about the structure,
[Guest]: I thought about it so much.
[Guest]: And I think I can say that the structure is entirely mine, nobody has helped me with it.
[Guest]: I just sat up all night thinking about it.
[Guest]: And I said, how do I humanize these women?
[Guest]: Because I don't I didn't want them to be sort of these plaster saints, oh, they're so worthy.
[Guest]: And you know, they're so wonderful.
[Guest]: And I mean, like, that will immediately put the reader off, oh, my God, there's a sanctimonious
[Guest]: and good and pioneers and blah, blah.
[Guest]: I wanted to humanize them, because none of them are perfect.
[Guest]: You know, they all have their, you know, kind of, you know, foibles and faults and things
[Guest]: on which they were probably wrong when you look back with hindsight.
[Guest]: So I worked so hard on the structure.
[Guest]: And I decided that, you know, because of my journalistic training, and the other thing
[Guest]: is that I've been a freelancer for many years for many reasons, which we may go into later.
[Guest]: And I know that, you know, in India, people think that freelancers are rubbish and badly
[Guest]: paid and they can't hack us, you know, a staff job.
[Guest]: I do not think so.
[Guest]: I think there's a lot of great journalism out there, which is done by freelancers.
[Guest]: I don't include myself in that category.
[Guest]: But one thing you do learn as a freelancer is to get the attention of the commissioning
[Guest]: editor.
[Guest]: That is a very important skill, because he has an inbox filled with, you know, hundreds
[Guest]: and hundreds of story pitches.
[Guest]: And, you know, he could assign any of these pitches to his staff.
[Guest]: And one thing I've learned in so many years of freelancing, which I've done on and off,
[Guest]: depending on where I was moving, is that I can get the attention of editors.
[Guest]: I don't know about the rest of it, but this much I have learned.
[Guest]: I know how to not bury the lead.
[Guest]: And I hope I have done that in my book, because my main thing was every chapter must grab
[Guest]: the reader.
[Guest]: They, it must not start with, I basically did not want to start with Anandi Bai was
[Guest]: born on 15 January in 1863 in this testing.
[Guest]: She then went on to study, no, nothing like that.
[Guest]: I wanted it to just absolutely grab the reader, which is why, you know, I've sort of titled
[Guest]: the chapters like that, you know, I mean, the title is maybe a bit of a simplification
[Guest]: of the women, but they sort of sum them up, you know, the good wife, the rule breaker,
[Guest]: the working mom, the fighter, the lawmaker.
[Guest]: So this sort of sums them up, and I thought that would sort of center them in the imagination
[Guest]: of the reader.
[Guest]: Regarding the writing of this book, I didn't mention my previous answer, but a lot of the
[Guest]: style of the book is due to the fantastic editing of Deepti Talwar at Westland, who
[Guest]: is my editor, and who is a fantastic editor.
[Guest]: And I must say that every writer needs an editor.
[Guest]: I do not believe that there is any writer who does not need one.
[Guest]: I certainly need one.
[Guest]: And she kicked this book and the style into shape to make it really simple and accessible
[Guest]: and readable for everybody.
[Guest]: So definitely a shout out for her.
[Guest]: I've forgotten the second part of your question now.
[Amit Varma]: The second part of my question was about what models did you have in terms of this kind
[Amit Varma]: of writing, nonfiction writing and so on?
[Guest]: Okay, you know, while I've been obviously reading journalism for years and years trying
[Guest]: to learn from, you know, great journalists, I used to read only fiction until a few years
[Guest]: ago.
[Guest]: So in my, you know, the books I read were just fiction, literary fiction, crime fiction,
[Guest]: I'm a big crime fiction fan.
[Guest]: And only about a few years ago, I suddenly woke up and realized, wow, there's so much
[Guest]: interesting nonfiction out there, which in some cases is far more interesting than the
[Guest]: fiction, which is not something I ever said before.
[Guest]: I suddenly woke up and realized that.
[Guest]: And among the nonfiction writers that I really love, who write such exciting nonfiction,
[Guest]: make it like thrillers, probably my favorite nonfiction writer of all time is David Gran,
[Guest]: who writes for the New Yorker.
[Guest]: And he's written several books, and one of the books is called Killers of the Flower
[Guest]: Moon.
[Guest]: It is about the founding of the FBI, after a string of murders in the Osage tribe in
[Guest]: the US.
[Guest]: And, you know, when I looked at it, I was like, oh, it sounds dull, sounds boring and
[Guest]: all that nonfiction.
[Guest]: I don't want to read this.
[Guest]: And it's just so thrilling.
[Guest]: It's like a page turner.
[Guest]: And I suddenly looked at that and said, wow, you know, nonfiction, this doesn't read like
[Guest]: nonfiction.
[Guest]: And I was reading everything he wrote, and he's written a lot of magazine pieces.
[Guest]: He's written this amazing piece.
[Guest]: Oh, my God.
[Guest]: I mean, if you can put it in your notes, David Gran, it's I don't remember the name of the
[Guest]: piece, but it's about he meets somebody who hunts the giant squid, the giant squid hunter,
[Guest]: something like that.
[Guest]: It's basically about a giant squid.
[Guest]: And it is amazing.
[Guest]: I mean, you just read that and you feel like you're on a boat in the Pacific hunting a
[Guest]: giant squid.
[Guest]: And that is a kind of writing that I'm trying to achieve.
[Guest]: I'm nowhere there yet, but I'm trying, I'm trying really hard.
[Guest]: So he was one, David Gran.
[Guest]: And, you know, then, you know, I suddenly started seeing such wonderful nonfiction in
[Guest]: India as well.
[Guest]: And I've mentioned Saman Subramaniam before, but Saman Subramaniam was one of them, Finding
[Guest]: Fish, his book and his latest book.
[Guest]: I also read that before writing this book, quite recently before writing this book, a
[Guest]: dominant character.
[Guest]: So in that book, he just takes the most complicated scientific concepts and boils them down and
[Guest]: makes it beautifully simple for someone like me who has no science background.
[Guest]: And so many wonderful writers, I was very influenced by, and I used to read Dalrymple
[Guest]: back in the day and I still read him and I still enjoy him.
[Guest]: But now I also read many Indians writing about their own history.
[Guest]: So I read everything that Manu Pillai has ever written, and he's quite a big source
[Guest]: for me in the chapter on Meri Poonan Lokos.
[Guest]: I love Ira Mukherjee, or maybe it's pronounced Ira Mukherjee, her, and she's sort of getting
[Guest]: better and better with each book.
[Guest]: I love Snigdha Poonam, loved her book Dreamers.
[Guest]: So there are all these amazing Indian writers who are writing fantastic nonfiction and,
[Guest]: you know, writing our own stories.
[Guest]: So I've been very influenced by that, and in the last few years, I was thinking I should
[Guest]: write something about our own history, even if I make a big mess of it, but I should attempt
[Guest]: it at least, you know.
[Guest]: And other people I've read in nonfiction who really, I loved John Currier's Bad Blood.
[Guest]: That's also another, you know, book which could have been very dull, but again, he writes
[Guest]: it like a, you know, thriller.
[Guest]: So these are the kind of people who have influenced me, and I think it's a very exciting time
[Guest]: for nonfiction in India, because most of the great books that I see, they're often nonfiction,
[Guest]: and they tend to be, I think, in my view, better edited than fiction often is, and editing
[Guest]: is very important, I think.
[Guest]: So I just think it's an exciting time for nonfiction.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I couldn't agree with you more, and we'll have all these links in the show notes,
[Amit Varma]: of course.
[Amit Varma]: And I've had episodes with many of the people you named, like Samant, like Manu Pillay,
[Amit Varma]: Ira Mukherjee, Narayani, Basu, also you had mentioned, you liked Snigdha Poonam, I had
[Amit Varma]: an episode back in the day, my episodes are only one hour, so maybe I'll have her on for
[Amit Varma]: a longer time, sometime.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on from here to another sort of fascinating aspect of your life.
[Guest]: Now, before we go back to your practicing law and journalism.
[Guest]: Can I just interrupt and say one more shout out, 52, 52 is amazing.
[Guest]: I have been reading all their stories, and I mean, that is just fantastic nonfiction
[Guest]: that they started with that Bhavya Dore piece on that collision.
[Guest]: So you know, I am sitting and reading all these pieces and learning how to make a long
[Guest]: read interesting.
[Guest]: So that is really great writing, and they are all Indian writers.
[Guest]: So you know, this thing that Indians write like X, and you know, white people write like
[Guest]: Y, it's no longer true.
[Guest]: Okay, we write as well as everybody, anybody else now.
[Amit Varma]: So let's just carry on with it.
[Amit Varma]: And 52, by the way, is 52.in.
[Amit Varma]: It's a magazine that brings out one long fiction, one long format piece of nonfiction every
[Amit Varma]: week.
[Amit Varma]: That's why it's called 52.
[Amit Varma]: It's edited by my good friend Supriya Nair, who was also on this show, by the way, I seem
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, at some point, I'm going to have had everybody on here, and then what
[Guest]: do I do?
[Guest]: Then it's all over.
[Guest]: I have so many suggestions.
[Guest]: There are so many wonderful people out there you should have on your show.
[Amit Varma]: Wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a discussion for after this episode, because I definitely will pick your brains
[Guest]: on that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to my next question connected both to your life and to the book itself.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the thought struck me where in your chapter called The Originals about pioneers
[Amit Varma]: in the medical field.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned this lady back in Athens called Agnodice, who may or may not have existed
[Amit Varma]: kind of apocryphal.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to ramble a little bit here, because that's kind of how my thoughts went.
[Amit Varma]: This is a woman who wanted to practice as a doctor, but women weren't doctors.
[Amit Varma]: So she dressed up as a man basically.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so she would help women with their deliveries, but their husbands got jealous
[Amit Varma]: because they were like, you know, this man is seducing our wives and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a court case.
[Amit Varma]: And then in that she had to in desperation show she was a woman.
[Amit Varma]: So you write in your book, quote, she lifted up her tunic and showed the court her pudenda,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote, which immediately reminded me of the film Yentl.
[Guest]: Have you seen Yentl?
[Guest]: I'm afraid I haven't.
[Guest]: I'm obviously heard of it, but I haven't.
[Amit Varma]: It basically shows Barbara Streisand, who also kind of dresses up as a man.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, she's sort of in love with this man called Avigdor, I hope I got his
[Amit Varma]: name right.
[Amit Varma]: And he doesn't know that she's a girl.
[Amit Varma]: So to prove that she shows him her breasts, and they kiss and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But then they decide to go their different ways.
[Amit Varma]: Because Yentl decides that either she pursues her career, or she chooses love, right?
[Amit Varma]: And this dichotomy springs up.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, in your book, you write about how another pioneer, Elizabeth Blackwell,
[Amit Varma]: also ditches a suitor, because she says that no, if I have to do medicine, I have to choose,
[Amit Varma]: I can't do one or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And these are choices that in different ways, confront the actual the six women you write
[Amit Varma]: about in your book, though, they often don't have so much volition as to this matter.
[Amit Varma]: In some cases, they're already married by the time they get into it, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And some of them do exercise whatever volition they have in interesting ways.
[Amit Varma]: This kind of leads me back to your predicament also as someone who's a traveling spouse.
[Amit Varma]: So you're traveling everywhere with your husband, as you pointed out, you've lived all across
[Amit Varma]: the world, you've described yourself as a trailing spouse, in fact, and you've pointed
[Amit Varma]: out that between 1996 and 2006, you move to a different country.
[Amit Varma]: Every two years, you've lived and worked in Hong Kong, Bangkok, Tokyo, London.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what this phase was for you.
[Amit Varma]: Like, how was it for you to kind of come to terms with not completely being in control
[Amit Varma]: of where you are at a given point in time?
[Amit Varma]: Was this something that led into you know, your freelancing and so on?
[Amit Varma]: Would your life have taken a very different turn?
[Amit Varma]: Like would you have written many more books or gone in different directions?
[Amit Varma]: Had you kind of been in one place, whichever place it would have been?
[Amit Varma]: What's your thinking on this?
[Guest]: Like?
[Guest]: I mean, it's another very complicated question.
[Guest]: And I do not talk about being a trailing spouse much on social media, probably many people
[Guest]: don't realize that I am one or it's just I'm very defensive about that aspect of my life.
[Guest]: And it's only now that I'm a lot older that I have come to terms with it.
[Guest]: I have been defensive about it and, you know, not talking about it for years.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And believe me, it was not my, I didn't grow up thinking I will marry a man and follow
[Guest]: him across the world.
[Guest]: That was like, really not my plan.
[Guest]: What can I say?
[Guest]: When I married my husband, and by the way, I also, I mean, I married out of caste, out
[Guest]: of community, out of everything, and I was the first person in my family to do so.
[Guest]: I'm not saying this as, you know, some sort of that I need some sort of pat on the back.
[Guest]: That's not my intention.
[Guest]: I'm just saying that I had already kind of, you know, gone through hell and high water
[Guest]: to marry him in the first place.
[Guest]: So I wasn't able to give up on him because of an unforeseen event, because I had already
[Guest]: kind of, you know, fought and cried and screamed and left home and all that just to do this.
[Guest]: Okay, so very soon into our marriage, very early on into our marriage, and my husband
[Guest]: works in finance, by the way, I mean, somebody asked me the other day if he was a diplomat
[Guest]: and, you know, the whole idea of me being a diplomat's wife with, you know, a bunch
[Guest]: of staff and a palatial house and people making orders for me.
[Guest]: That's not my life.
[Guest]: I'm basically yesterday, I have made khichdi in an Instapot.
[Guest]: That is my life.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I am.
[Guest]: Okay, so my husband works in finance, and he's worked very hard to get where he is.
[Guest]: He does not come from a privileged family at all.
[Guest]: Yes, I won't go into the details, but let's just say he grew up in rural West Bengal,
[Guest]: and he is practically the first educated person in his family.
[Guest]: So he has worked for this in a way that has come very easily to me, coming from a much
[Guest]: more privileged family.
[Guest]: So very soon into our marriage, he got this unbelievable offer to move to Hong Kong.
[Guest]: And I had very mixed feelings at that time, because I didn't want to give up my job.
[Guest]: I didn't know what I would do in Hong Kong.
[Guest]: I had no Chinese skills at that time, the handover was going on, and Chinese skills
[Guest]: are very, very important, 97.
[Guest]: And all these fears were borne out when I got there, I was like a pariah, and people
[Guest]: were like, what you've worked for Ecotimes, I'd never heard of that.
[Guest]: What National Law School?
[Guest]: What is that?
[Guest]: I mean, like, you know, they never heard of it.
[Guest]: I was proud to have gone to National Law School, but you know, I was competing with people
[Guest]: from Yale and Harvard and actually not even that I don't even know I'm safe, but I said
[Guest]: that I was, I was also competing with people who hadn't even passed standard 12.
[Guest]: I mean, that is also the case.
[Guest]: So I was absolutely struggling.
[Guest]: And for years, I mean, we kept moving every two years, our trajectory was something like
[Guest]: Hong Kong, Bangkok, back to Hong Kong, Tokyo, London, in the first five years, because at
[Guest]: that point, he was moved very often when you're a junior in that program.
[Guest]: And it's a very good kind of program, they really take care of you in terms of
[Guest]: perks.
[Guest]: But it's also a very 50s program.
[Guest]: It's basically the husband goes into work and the wife will sort everything out.
[Guest]: So you know, I was like, and people people say, Wow, what a glamorous life and all that.
[Guest]: There were many points when I was like, you know, in complete tears, like, you know, I
[Guest]: had just landed in Tokyo, I had a two year old my daughter, my older one was about two
[Guest]: then, I had to find an English speaking doctor, which was very difficult in the Tokyo of that
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: So this was just when the internet was sort of had just arrived on the horizon.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And you know, I had to find an English speaking doctor, there was an earthquake, I think one
[Guest]: day after we got there, my husband went off to work and I stayed at home to deal with
[Guest]: the earthquake.
[Unknown]: Remember, I don't have any Japanese language skills, I'm not very good at languages, to
[Guest]: be honest, and with moving every two years, you don't really pick up much language.
[Guest]: So I'm stuck here with a two year old and I don't have any family help.
[Guest]: And obviously, paid help and all is very expensive in foreign countries.
[Guest]: So I'm stuck there, I have to deal with an earthquake, I looked up what I'm, we had actually
[Guest]: got an earthquake pack, you're basically supposed to hide under the dining table, and then you're
[Guest]: supposed to have an earthquake pack, which you keep at any time so you can flee.
[Guest]: Okay, and then you have this broadcast coming out in the local radio, you know, hide under
[Guest]: that this thing don't move.
[Guest]: It's all in Japanese.
[Guest]: So we can't understand.
[Guest]: So I got on the table with my daughter and I kept her there.
[Guest]: And this was a frequent occurrence.
[Guest]: So you know, complete challenges like that, you have children, you don't speak the language,
[Guest]: your husband will go off to work where he will be a very important person, you know,
[Guest]: and you are not an important person, you are just a trailing spouse.
[Guest]: At the time I was going through it, I was really suffering.
[Guest]: I was like, you know what, I'm quite intelligent, I don't need to do all these coffee mornings
[Guest]: and, you know, expat spouse parties and shopping trips to buy Chinese porcelain and all that's
[Guest]: just not me.
[Guest]: And I really resisted it.
[Guest]: And probably because I was young, and when you're young, you think, you know, the more
[Guest]: you fight, the more you can, you know, have your way.
[Guest]: And as I'm older, now I realize I should have not exactly accepted it, but gone with the
[Guest]: flow because it taught me lots of things.
[Guest]: The problem is that the learnings were not apparent until 10 years later.
[Guest]: So when I was actually going through it, I was like, why am I doing this?
[Guest]: What the hell?
[Guest]: And this is nonsense, and I deserve better, and etc, etc, etc.
[Guest]: I mean, meanwhile, all the people that I, you know, studied it was scaling the, you
[Guest]: know, corporate ladder, either in law or in journalism, I was just sitting there doing
[Guest]: a bit of freelancing, and whatnot.
[Guest]: Having said that, if I had not moved, I think I would not be the writer I am today, because
[Guest]: I think I might have just stuck with, you know, legal journalism, which is what I, after
[Guest]: I graduated from National Law School, I practiced very briefly with a law firm, I decided I
[Guest]: can't do this nonsense.
[Guest]: And I started working for The Eco Times as a legal correspondent.
[Guest]: And then I moved to Business India, I think I would have stuck with financial journalism,
[Guest]: simply because, you know, it's better paid than some others, and I had some skills, and
[Guest]: I had some legal skills, and blah, blah.
[Guest]: And I would have stuck with that, and I would not have written features, which is where
[Guest]: my true love lives, I would not have written long form, I may not even have written any
[Guest]: books, I might have said, no, I because the people that I used to work with back then
[Guest]: are still there.
[Guest]: And they are still doing what they did, when I left.
[Guest]: So I feel like I wouldn't have had some of the kind of growth.
[Guest]: And all this is now just after the fact, when I was actually going through this, I was like,
[Guest]: you know, weeping and crying and all that, I mean, I'm making it sound that all I did
[Guest]: was weep and cry.
[Guest]: That's not true.
[Guest]: Because I have a very adventurous spirit.
[Guest]: That's one thing that I do have.
[Guest]: And I've only become more adventurous as I've gotten older.
[Guest]: And something in me really loves this thing of starting over, doing everything again,
[Guest]: you know, it's a big pain.
[Guest]: And there's a lot of boring admin and rubbish like that.
[Guest]: And, you know, but there is also an incredible excitement in seeing new things that you would
[Guest]: never see, meeting new people.
[Guest]: And before I became an expatriate, I was a bit shy, I was like, very reserved.
[Guest]: And, you know, I would be like, Oh, what are people thinking of me?
[Guest]: And, you know, and one thing I have realized in this expatriate, you know, lifestyle is
[Guest]: that you don't need to worry about what people are thinking about you, because nobody's thinking
[Guest]: about you.
[Guest]: I mean, you're not that important to people, they're really not thinking about you.
[Guest]: Everybody has their own problems.
[Guest]: And one thing that I learned in this expat life is to just try to make the most of everything,
[Guest]: get out there, speak to people, you know, ask for help if need be.
[Guest]: And I think that has been useful.
[Guest]: Obviously, I've also made great sacrifices.
[Guest]: So you know, does that answer your question?
[Guest]: It's a it's a big muddle.
[Guest]: The whole thing is a big muddle.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of it is very resonant.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something I speak about in my writing class as well, because so many young
[Amit Varma]: writers, including me once upon a time, including I'm sure you including everybody, we are so
[Amit Varma]: paralyzed by the anxiety of what other people will think of us, what will the editor think?
[Amit Varma]: What will the reader think?
[Amit Varma]: And it's something that I think you need to reach middle age to realize, as I did, that
[Amit Varma]: no one's thinking of you, no one gives a shit.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody's got their heads up their own ass.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you can do whatever the hell you want.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, there is one aspect in which things are kind of different.
[Amit Varma]: If you're a public figure, they're taking screenshots of you every day, and they'll
[Amit Varma]: be on Twitter 20 years later.
[Amit Varma]: But by and large, everybody's dealing with their own problems.
[Amit Varma]: So that whole anxiety, which is perhaps a fundamental human anxiety, because we're so
[Amit Varma]: wired to crave validation, and all that is completely pointless.
[Amit Varma]: My follow up question to this is this, something else that you have also spoken about is late
[Amit Varma]: bloomers.
[Amit Varma]: And that's something that's kind of resonant with me, because I find myself in the second
[Amit Varma]: half of my 40s, thinking that, damn it, there are so many things I wanted to do basically
[Amit Varma]: everything I dreamed of when I was 20.
[Amit Varma]: And it's all not done.
[Amit Varma]: And most of it is not done.
[Amit Varma]: The good things might have happened by accident here and there, but most of it is not done.
[Amit Varma]: And you think, is it too late?
[Amit Varma]: And when we are young, we think that we have done everything by 3035, we will be burnt
[Amit Varma]: out by 40.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, here we are, and there's not so much of that.
[Amit Varma]: And one can, of course, get inspired by people like one of my favorite novelists, Penelope
[Amit Varma]: Fitzgerald.
[Amit Varma]: She started her literary career when she was 58 years old.
[Amit Varma]: And then she wrote a bunch of great books like The Bookshop, The Blue Flower, and my
[Amit Varma]: favorite The Gate of Angels, which she wrote, I think, when she was in her 70s.
[Amit Varma]: So there is kind of scope.
[Amit Varma]: And you would imagine that if life teaches you life lessons, then it stands to reason
[Amit Varma]: that one can do one's best work a little later on in life.
[Amit Varma]: What do you feel about this?
[Amit Varma]: Because at one level, I guess you must have been to some extent, bogged down by all the
[Amit Varma]: duties one has towards family and the fact that you have to, you know, uproot yourself
[Amit Varma]: every couple of years and all of that.
[Guest]: So tell me your thoughts on this.
[Guest]: So I'm very much a fan of late blooming, I talk a lot about this, and I hope to talk
[Guest]: more about it.
[Guest]: I didn't want to talk about this earlier, because I was like, I'm not successful enough
[Guest]: to talk about being a late bloomer.
[Guest]: Nobody knows whom I am.
[Guest]: I mean, how can I even say I've bloomed?
[Guest]: But now I've decided to talk about it, even if I'm not successful, because maybe I'm not
[Guest]: successful, but I'm at least enjoying what I do.
[Guest]: That's good enough, right?
[Guest]: I mean, that is still blooming.
[Guest]: So it's I think I can still talk about it.
[Guest]: So you're right, my 20s and 30s were mostly spent moving and supporting my husband's career.
[Guest]: I mean, I sound like such a stepford wife here.
[Guest]: But you know, this is the path that our life took, and there were many great advantages
[Guest]: and obviously financial.
[Guest]: But other than that, I mean, just seeing the world at such a young age is a huge gift in
[Guest]: many ways.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I went along with it.
[Guest]: So I looked after the children, I have two children, I looked after them, I practically
[Guest]: reared them completely on my own when they were young, certainly because I didn't have
[Guest]: any family help or whatever.
[Guest]: In some ways, that's good.
[Guest]: I'm not dependent on anybody, nobody has helped me do anything in my life.
[Guest]: So I'm not required, I'm not beholden to anybody, as some people are, you know.
[Guest]: So I looked after children.
[Guest]: At that point in time, I was really not thinking of writing a book, I was doing a lot of freelancing
[Guest]: and learning to find my voice.
[Guest]: And as I said, trying to write in a more simple and international style.
[Guest]: So wherever I went, I reported on that country.
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't want to be a parachute journalist.
[Guest]: So I didn't write about like big political stories and all that kind of thing.
[Guest]: But I just kept writing and it was some days, some years I wrote more than other years.
[Guest]: And I just kept writing and writing and writing and writing and nobody knew me in India, because
[Guest]: these were all for, you know, foreign papers like, you know, Asia Week, Far Eastern Economic
[Guest]: Journal, South China Morning Post, I did a lot of work for back in the day, Japan Times,
[Guest]: all these, you know, sort of local kind of papers, then some American newspapers, you
[Guest]: know, called Women's News, I just kept writing, I never thought of writing a book.
[Guest]: And I'm not even sure that even if I'd stayed in one place, I might have written a book.
[Guest]: Because at that point, I was thinking, I'm not competent to write a book, I don't have
[Guest]: an idea, I don't know anything, I also don't have the discipline, that discipline had to
[Guest]: be cultivated.
[Guest]: And it obviously got easier as my kids got older.
[Guest]: And I got back my brain, I mean, when my kids were young, and I know that many, there are
[Guest]: many, many women on Twitter who feel the same way, I think, in India, you have a sort of
[Guest]: a set kind of thing, you must, you know, enter college at around 18.
[Guest]: Then four years later, you must finish.
[Guest]: After that, you may go for a master's, it should be one year.
[Guest]: So by 23, you will start earning, then you have to progress in your career, then by 30,
[Guest]: you may have one child 28 or 30.
[Guest]: Then you might after a few years, couple of few years, you might have another child.
[Guest]: And it's a sort of a very linear signposted way for you.
[Guest]: And if you deviate from this post, people are alarmed.
[Guest]: They're like, no, but you are in your 20s, you should be doing X, or you should be doing
[Guest]: Y.
[Guest]: And I've spoken this about this on Twitter before, and Twitter is a very young medium,
[Guest]: and I love it.
[Guest]: But quite often, I feel like this is a really ageist medium, because everybody on Twitter
[Guest]: is saying, I'm 25 next year, my life is over.
[Guest]: You know, I have not achieved anything.
[Guest]: Oh, woe is me.
[Guest]: And I'm thinking, you know what, we're all going to live so much longer than our parents
[Guest]: or our parents, parents, apart from COVID, I'm not gonna consider COVID in this scenario.
[Guest]: If COVID had not come along, we would all have expected to live into our 90s, possibly.
[Guest]: I mean, my granny just passed away last month.
[Guest]: She was 96 years old, and she was active and well and doing things till the very last day.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I feel like there is a lot of time and there's no point in getting panicked into
[Guest]: thinking I should be doing X and I should be doing Y.
[Guest]: And it's there's nothing wrong with doing X and Y.
[Guest]: But for a lot of Indian women, it doesn't happen for us because we are looking after
[Guest]: children or we are doing other things.
[Guest]: And then of course, there are these days, a lot of people don't have children, perfectly
[Guest]: valid choice.
[Guest]: That's fine.
[Guest]: But I just want to say one thing, I mean, I want to remind once on Twitter, I had this
[Guest]: unpleasant conversation with somebody who was very young.
[Guest]: And this conversation has actually motivated me and in some ways, my books have been written
[Guest]: out of spite.
[Guest]: I mean, that spite is the main, you know, sort of motivating factor because she said
[Guest]: something to me like mothers can't achieve anything.
[Guest]: Once Indian women become mothers, they can't do anything.
[Guest]: And she's like, you know, my mother, after she became a mother, she could have written
[Guest]: so many books.
[Guest]: And I was like, you think we can't write books just because we are mothers?
[Guest]: And she's like, yeah, I don't think mothers have the, you know, the mental space to write
[Guest]: books.
[Guest]: And she was very confident in this, even though there were millions and millions of women
[Guest]: who are mothers and writing, in fact, most of them.
[Guest]: So I took that as a challenge.
[Guest]: This was before my first book, and I didn't say anything to her.
[Guest]: Inwardly, I said to myself, you know what, it's time to write a book, let me get up and
[Guest]: write a book.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And obviously, my first book is a how to book, it's like a guide to freelance journalism.
[Guest]: So maybe it's not great literature, whatever.
[Guest]: I have got a lot of very positive feedback, and it has sold reasonably well for somebody
[Guest]: who is completely unknown.
[Guest]: And then it's still selling, I'm still getting, you know, figures for that selling.
[Guest]: It's like six years old now.
[Guest]: So people responded to that.
[Guest]: And I was happy with it.
[Guest]: And basically, I wrote it to prove that yes, I'm not just mummy, you know, I don't have
[Guest]: to be this domestic goddess all the time, though I'm not actually a domestic goddess,
[Guest]: but still.
[Guest]: And I feel like so many women on Twitter are saying things like, yeah, but you know, I
[Guest]: have to look after my children now.
[Guest]: And by the time I finish that, I have to look after my in-laws.
[Guest]: And by the time I finish that, I have to look after my parents.
[Guest]: And by that time, I'll be 90 years old.
[Guest]: And I will just, you know, or actually, they don't even think like that.
[Guest]: They think by that time, I will be 50 years old, and my life is over.
[Guest]: And then, you know, it's just singing bhajans, preparing to die, and you know, getting aches
[Guest]: and pains.
[Guest]: And I just don't have any patience with this kind of thinking, because I honestly think
[Guest]: that possibly, I may live, all the women in my family are very long lived, and they live
[Guest]: to the mid 90s.
[Guest]: I think I have another, possibly another 45 years, okay, possibly.
[Guest]: And if COVID doesn't get me, that is, and I plan to make the most of them, I'm not going
[Guest]: to sit around moaning that I'm old, you know, I'll be older by the time I've done that.
[Guest]: So I do, I also think that, you know, sometimes you don't come to these things until later,
[Guest]: I don't think, first of all, I couldn't have written the book about freelance journalism,
[Guest]: unless I had some experience in freelance journalism.
[Guest]: So there would have been no point writing it, you know, when I was 30 or something.
[Guest]: My second book was a novel, The Librarian.
[Guest]: It's a very flawed book.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I can see now that I have gone very wrong in that, having said that there are people
[Guest]: who love it and have written to me saying so, a very small audience, but still an audience.
[Guest]: And this book, I feel like I needed to really work and understand these women before writing
[Guest]: about them.
[Guest]: And I do not think I could have written this book when I was in my 20s, or even in my 30s,
[Guest]: I needed to get a little life experience and know a little about things before writing
[Guest]: this book.
[Guest]: So I'm just a big fan of late blooming in general.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I haven't read The Librarian, but I must say that, welcome to the club of
[Amit Varma]: people who have written flawed first books, flawed first novels, and while we are both
[Amit Varma]: kind of hitting the bhajan singing age, I don't think we'll be singing bhajans anytime
[Amit Varma]: soon.
[Amit Varma]: But having said that, I think I should clarify on both our behalves that we have nothing
[Guest]: against people who like to sing bhajans.
[Guest]: No, no, nothing against that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: If that's what your passion is, you should do it.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of brings me to the next thought, which is kind of sparked by, you know, this
[Amit Varma]: young person you mentioned on Twitter, whoever it was, who said mothers can't write books
[Amit Varma]: and thus provoked you into writing these books.
[Amit Varma]: So it shows that young people do have their uses after all.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, this reminds me of something that Jonathan Haidt once pointed out, where
[Amit Varma]: he spoke about what has been happening over the last 10 years on the internet, where earlier
[Amit Varma]: it used to be a fashionable notion that what will happen to the boys, they are playing
[Amit Varma]: video games all the time.
[Amit Varma]: But it turns out that that's actually a good thing, because they're doing problem solving
[Amit Varma]: and they're immersed and it is also social, it's not affecting them so much.
[Amit Varma]: But the his point was, and a point made by many others who've been writing about social
[Amit Varma]: media as well, is that it has a more worrisome effect on the young girls.
[Amit Varma]: Because typically, the social life of young girls would be with other girls, where they're
[Amit Varma]: socializing, they're hanging out, they're talking about stuff.
[Amit Varma]: But what the internet does, and especially what social media does, is that it forces
[Amit Varma]: you into this performative space, where you are all the time performing to enhance a brand
[Amit Varma]: called yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And it therefore seems to me that one, there is this performative element of everything
[Amit Varma]: on social media, even for people who are not necessarily so young.
[Amit Varma]: And this performative thing can become very toxic sometimes and can drive people to extremes.
[Amit Varma]: But what it also then does is that you begin to think in terms of life.
[Amit Varma]: I often used to say when I was younger, that there are two kinds of writers, which is those
[Amit Varma]: who want to be known as writers, and those who love to write, you know, and obviously,
[Amit Varma]: the good writing will emerge from those in the second category who just love to write
[Amit Varma]: and then things happen.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you just, you know, want that whole kind of branding of I am a writer, it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: really work out.
[Amit Varma]: And I feel that a lot of young people are falling into those traps of thinking that
[Amit Varma]: I have to achieve XYZ or ABC before I am so and so age, which is where that lament that
[Amit Varma]: you quoted came from that, oh, I'm 25 and my life is over and all of that, which is
[Amit Varma]: fairly amusing.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this is kind of something to watch out for.
[Amit Varma]: But the other thing that I must also say here is that it's easy to look at the vocal minorities
[Amit Varma]: on social media and think that, oh, what has happened to young people today.
[Amit Varma]: But if one looks at the silent majorities from my experience of interacting with younger
[Amit Varma]: people, and I'm sounding so much like an old fogey just by using that phrase, but I kind
[Amit Varma]: of find that they're mostly sensible, hardworking, great ethic, humble, willing to learn, it's
[Amit Varma]: just a vocal minority that really spoils their image.
[Amit Varma]: But kind of leaving that aside, let's let's move back to freelancing, right?
[Amit Varma]: You know, that one, why did you choose freelancing?
[Amit Varma]: Was it because you were so itinerant and moving around?
[Guest]: Yeah, that was, that was, I mean, that was the chief reason.
[Guest]: And I mean, I know it doesn't sound very cool to say it, but let's let me just be honest
[Guest]: here.
[Guest]: And, you know, it was very itinerant, I could do it from everywhere.
[Guest]: And I could do it without having to get child care for my children, which was difficult
[Guest]: in some countries.
[Guest]: So, yeah, sadly, I don't have a very cool reason.
[Guest]: I mean, since then, there are many things I like about it.
[Guest]: I like the fact that, I mean, I haven't specialized, which is also maybe not a good thing, like
[Guest]: I'm not a health journalist, or I'm not a political journalist, I write on lots and
[Guest]: lots of things which interest me.
[Guest]: And I don't think that's actually very good for your career.
[Guest]: I do say in my book that you should try to specialize, but this is the way it's worked
[Guest]: out for me.
[Guest]: See, the other thing that you have to realize about me is that I have a lot of advice for
[Guest]: other people, which I've been completely unable to follow myself.
[Guest]: So don't take me as some kind of guru.
[Guest]: So I have written on so many things, I've written on books, I've written on health,
[Guest]: I've written on society, I've written on young women, I've written on this, I've written
[Guest]: on that, depending on what I saw around me in whichever country I've done travel, I've
[Guest]: done this.
[Guest]: And I've really enjoyed that kind of variety.
[Guest]: It's probably not the best professional decision, but whatever, I have enjoyed it.
[Guest]: And I mean, like, let me also say that, you know, let me just acknowledge this once and
[Guest]: I'm not going to talk about it again.
[Guest]: Obviously, I am coming from a lot of privilege and nobody should take my advice on anything
[Guest]: because young people these days, they have to earn money immediately they graduate and
[Guest]: especially with the pandemic.
[Guest]: So I'm not going to give financial advice or any kind of life advice to anybody.
[Guest]: Obviously, I have a lot of privilege in my life.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So having said that, it is not easy to keep uprooting your life every two years and dealing
[Guest]: with all that kind of change.
[Guest]: I know a lot of people have meltdowns even when they have to move from one part of the
[Guest]: city to another.
[Guest]: So I would also say that I'm fairly resilient and I don't, I have learned to stop moaning
[Guest]: and just get on with things because this is the way my life has been.
[Guest]: So that's how I took to freelancing.
[Guest]: And I'm not sure that I, these days freelancing is very difficult and I'm really not sure
[Guest]: that I want to continue doing it.
[Guest]: I think I may want to do something else, but we'll have to see.
[Amit Varma]: Like write many, many books or discover the joy of singing bhajans.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the reason I mentioned that earlier was that if that's what you enjoy doing, you
[Amit Varma]: should do it.
[Amit Varma]: You should not think that, oh, I am 25, life is almost over.
[Amit Varma]: You know, why should I sing bhajans?
[Amit Varma]: I have to do something which will get me acclaimed in my circles.
[Amit Varma]: But no, if you love doing bhajans, sing bhajans.
[Guest]: I mean, I should also mention my mother at this stage.
[Guest]: I mean, she's not listening to this podcast, but my mother is an amazing person.
[Guest]: I have talked about my father.
[Guest]: I have not talked about my mother.
[Guest]: Let me also say that, you know, I'm saying nice things about my parents now, people may
[Guest]: get the impression that I have zero conflict with them and that I have a wonderful functional
[Guest]: relationship.
[Guest]: No, that is not the case.
[Guest]: I've had a lot of conflict with them.
[Guest]: It's just that as I get older, I have learned to look past that conflict and look at the
[Guest]: good things.
[Guest]: I don't really have time to, you know, keep battling with my mother all day.
[Guest]: My father has been gone for a while now.
[Guest]: So it's just my mother.
[Guest]: My mother is an amazing woman.
[Guest]: I mean, she's 76 years old now.
[Guest]: And at 75, she started learning the sitar and now she has passed her first exam.
[Guest]: And I have never heard the words, I'm too old for this come out of her mouth.
[Guest]: In fact, she spends most of her time saying, I don't want to hang out with all these oldies.
[Guest]: And when you actually look, you can see that the oldies are some 10 years younger than
[Guest]: her.
[Guest]: And she hangs out with people in their 30s because she does a lot of volunteer work.
[Guest]: You know, she's a bonsai, she's basically a bonsai teacher and, you know, she was like,
[Guest]: you know, she has about 400 bonsai.
[Guest]: So she gardens, she plays the sitar.
[Guest]: Before the pandemic, she used to do solo travel.
[Guest]: She used to just pack up and go to various hill stations and this, that to look at gardens
[Guest]: and things.
[Guest]: So she's an amazing woman.
[Guest]: And I've never seen her say anything like, I'm old, I'm going to die.
[Guest]: She's, which is such a relief, you know, given the parents that some people have.
[Guest]: Even with COVID, she's a little, little down because of the restriction on her social circle.
[Guest]: But still, she never says things like that.
[Guest]: She just gets on with it.
[Guest]: And she does a lot of exciting things.
[Guest]: She learns music online, she has completely become completely tech savvy.
[Guest]: I mean, before I left Bangalore, I taught her whatever tech and initially she said,
[Guest]: that was the first time I heard her say, oh, I don't know whether I can cope with all this
[Guest]: tech.
[Guest]: And I said, yes, you can cope.
[Guest]: And I taught her and now she's Zooming.
[Guest]: She's using GPA.
[Guest]: She's doing 101 other things all on the internet.
[Guest]: So in a way, she is my model that I honestly think that it's never too late.
[Guest]: And I just wanted to say something to, I assume there are a lot of women listening to you
[Guest]: who are currently struggling, struggling with childcare, because obviously no schools for
[Guest]: more than a year and struggling with homeschooling and struggling with all of it and probably
[Guest]: wondering what they're on this planet for and when they will ever do anything for themselves.
[Guest]: And I just wanted to say, you know, this is all very normal.
[Guest]: And I have done it for years where it's not so much time.
[Guest]: It's not, you don't need time to write a book.
[Guest]: What you need is focus.
[Guest]: This is why, you know, there are lots of people who have all the time in the world, but have
[Guest]: not actually written any books.
[Guest]: They don't have focus and focus can be achieved by anybody.
[Guest]: Even if you have 10 children, you can achieve focus.
[Guest]: You just have to find that half an hour in your life.
[Guest]: And all these books, and I'm going on a bit because I feel quite strongly about the subject.
[Guest]: All my books were written between 5am and 7am in the morning.
[Guest]: Yes, you have to give up something.
[Guest]: I decided that I'm going to give up getting up at a human time.
[Guest]: I decided that I would, when I'm writing this book, I will get up at 5am because I am an
[Guest]: early riser.
[Guest]: I think best early.
[Guest]: Get up at 5am, put in two hours or maybe even one hour, write even 500 words a day.
[Guest]: Even that is fine.
[Guest]: Write even 200 words a day, but try to write every day except maybe possibly on the weekend
[Guest]: you could take a thing.
[Guest]: Just keep that going because if you write 200 words a day, I mean, you can write a book
[Guest]: in a year or so.
[Guest]: You can still write a book in a year or so.
[Guest]: So continue doing that and even if you don't have all the time in the world, you know,
[Guest]: think about your book and muse and find the creative muse.
[Guest]: None of that matters.
[Guest]: Just find the focus to do 200 words a day or 500 words a day if you can manage that
[Guest]: and keep doing that and keep doing that and keep doing that until finally you end up with
[Guest]: something worth printing or publishing.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, very wise words and I feel watched in multiple ways.
[Amit Varma]: First of all, you said people who have all the time in the world, but they don't write
[Amit Varma]: the books they should because they have no focus.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for that.
[Amit Varma]: That's been me so far.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing you said is actually one of the slides in the final webinar I gave for
[Amit Varma]: my writing course, which is set yourself easy targets and the exact target that I point
[Amit Varma]: out is 200 words a day.
[Amit Varma]: And my whole point being that you have to keep exercising your writing muscle.
[Amit Varma]: 200 words is about how much I speak in a minute, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's that easy.
[Amit Varma]: It's about how much we speak in a minute, even if you're having a busy day, you're in
[Amit Varma]: bed with fever, or you're going to the airport to catch a flight in post COVID times, you
[Amit Varma]: can just write it on your phone.
[Amit Varma]: It's important to keep that muscle moving.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, most days you'll write more than 200.
[Amit Varma]: But if you just set yourself a bloody minded target of 200 words, get it done no matter
[Amit Varma]: what in a year, like you pointed out that 75,000 words, it's novel length.
[Amit Varma]: And even if you're not physically writing a novel, it is still incredibly useful because
[Amit Varma]: you're writing muscle is working and that really counts for a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, you know, one question that I sometimes get is, but I don't have anything
[Amit Varma]: to write about what shall I write?
[Amit Varma]: And I'm like, at the very least, you can even do journaling, write about what happened that
[Amit Varma]: day, write about anything, it doesn't matter, write about anything, as long as you're kind
[Amit Varma]: of writing.
[Amit Varma]: So these are really wise words.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I'm reminded of an interview I read of some sports person 20 years ago,
[Amit Varma]: I don't even remember who it was, it sounds very dravid like, but I don't think it is.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I know it, it isn't, but sounds a lot like that, where this person was asked
[Amit Varma]: about talent, that what is the most important talent in that specific sport.
[Amit Varma]: And what he said was the most important talent is this, that you've been waking up every
[Amit Varma]: day at whatever time to go running and one day you wake up at that time, and your whole
[Amit Varma]: body is aching and is raining outside, there's a storm, and you still get up from your bed
[Amit Varma]: and you still go running.
[Guest]: And that's the talent.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think people think of sort of discipline as a talent in itself.
[Amit Varma]: And I think discipline comes easier to some than others, one has to work at it.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, ultimately, things get written, not when you get inspired.
[Amit Varma]: But when you put get your butt down on the chair, and you just get the job done.
[Guest]: I totally agree.
[Guest]: And you know, a lot of women and I keep saying women because you know, in our society, women
[Guest]: have obviously still have more child care than men.
[Guest]: It's just the way it is.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: For me, it was because my husband was earning so much more than me that it made more sense
[Guest]: for me to take care of the children.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So anyway, whatever reason, women have more child care.
[Guest]: And I know so many women who say, oh, you know, because of my children, I can't write
[Guest]: any books.
[Guest]: And let me say now that you need not write any books if you don't want to.
[Guest]: Believe me, writing books is not the exalted pursuit that people think it is.
[Guest]: It's a lot of work for very little money.
[Guest]: And you may decide you don't want to write any books.
[Guest]: But whatever you want to do, like maybe some writing endeavor, maybe just even start a
[Guest]: blog, whatever, you know, or write like, you know, an essay.
[Guest]: People keep saying, oh, you know, it's my children, they get in my way.
[Guest]: I cannot do anything, you know, my children, my children.
[Guest]: And please do not blame your children, because you can write around children.
[Guest]: I admit that I wrote very little when my children was really young, like babies.
[Guest]: But you know, once they crossed a year or so, I started writing.
[Guest]: And I just find that trope is going to become dangerous.
[Guest]: Because believe me, children do not get any easier as they get older.
[Guest]: It's just that, you know, maybe physically they may be easier, but mentally, you will
[Guest]: still be constantly thinking about them.
[Guest]: And in this pandemic, you'll be wondering what the hell they're going to do and, you
[Guest]: know, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: So you are going to be going on with that for a while.
[Guest]: So just start writing whatever you want to now.
[Guest]: I mean, kind of don't wait.
[Guest]: One of the, you know, things about being a late bloomer, which is me, one of my big regrets
[Guest]: with being a late bloomer is my father has not seen any of my books.
[Guest]: And in fact, he has not even seen some of my good writing because for the last few years
[Guest]: of his life, he had cancer and he was like bedridden and he didn't have the brain space
[Guest]: to kind of look at my writing.
[Guest]: Okay, I mean, he would look as much as he couldn't give me a few tips.
[Guest]: But that is the downside of being a late bloomer that the people in your life who really encourage
[Guest]: you didn't get, don't get to see it, I suppose.
[Guest]: So but I just wanted to say that discipline is so important.
[Guest]: I think it was, it could have been Rushdie who said this, but I'm saying it again, that
[Guest]: anyone can start a book, any person, talent, connections, whatever, any person can start
[Guest]: a book.
[Guest]: To finish it is a real thing.
[Guest]: That's where it, that's where the achievement is, to finish it.
[Guest]: And you can go on endlessly for years, but remember, perfect is the enemy of done.
[Guest]: I mean, I could have, I could have gone on with this book.
[Guest]: And there was a time when I thought, you know what, I'm just going to wait until the pandemic
[Guest]: is over.
[Guest]: And then I'm going to finish it when I have better research.
[Guest]: And then at some point, I realized that the pandemic is not going to be over anytime soon.
[Guest]: And then I got up and I finished it.
[Guest]: So you know, that's what it is.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, one of my previous guests in a previous episode, Vinay Sitapati, once said, said on
[Amit Varma]: that episode, in fact, that perfection is the enemy of production, which is very true.
[Amit Varma]: And I keep I keep talking to my writing students about how in anything that you do in life,
[Amit Varma]: there's really this trade off between getting it done and getting it right.
[Amit Varma]: And as a writer, if you just focus on getting it right, you will just paralyze yourself.
[Amit Varma]: You know, as far as the first draft is concerned, your job is to get it done.
[Amit Varma]: It's a dump of the brain, just get it out there.
[Amit Varma]: And then you have something to work with.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of move on now to this specific book.
[Amit Varma]: Like how did you arrive at this specific subject?
[Amit Varma]: Because it's not just it's a one, it's a book that's hard to categorize in a good way, in
[Amit Varma]: the sense that it is nonfiction.
[Amit Varma]: It's also a book of history, where you've also looked at primary sources and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also a page turner, like you said, the kind of book you could pick up at an airport
[Amit Varma]: and finish on a flight again in a good way.
[Amit Varma]: So how did you arrive at the subject and how did your thinking on it evolve and what are
[Amit Varma]: the kind of challenges you face just in terms of the material available to you, which you
[Amit Varma]: already referred to earlier, but just in terms of the fact that some of this stuff is in
[Amit Varma]: other languages, that some of these women haven't, you know, written at all, how did
[Amit Varma]: you deal with all those issues?
[Guest]: So I have spoken about this quite often, because I've done a lot of interviews.
[Guest]: So you may see this in the press.
[Guest]: It actually all began with like a Google Doodle.
[Guest]: I saw this Google Doodle of Rukmabai Raut on her 153rd birthday, which was, I think,
[Guest]: in late 2017.
[Guest]: And I suddenly realized that I didn't know much about Rukmabai Raut.
[Guest]: I knew she existed, I knew she had done cool things, and that was the extent of my knowledge
[Guest]: on her.
[Guest]: And I did a bit of digging and I was like, this is just amazing.
[Guest]: This woman, in the 1880s, left a child marriage, went to court and divorced her husband, gave
[Guest]: all her thoughts on, you know, Hindu, you know, patriarchy and how, you know, women
[Guest]: were married off in their, you know, when they should actually be educated and wrote
[Guest]: about, wrote to the Times of India about how she wanted to get an education and she didn't
[Guest]: want to be married to her useless, wasteful husband, stood up to Tilak and the conservatives.
[Guest]: And you know, we always think of Tilak as such a great man in her textbooks, he's revered.
[Guest]: And he was a great man, he was, but at the same time, he also had very antiquated views
[Guest]: on things.
[Guest]: So, you know, I read about and then she eventually went to London, the London School of Medicine,
[Guest]: and she got a degree, she came back to India, she had a full and independent life, she never
[Guest]: married and she continued her career.
[Guest]: And I read about this woman and I said, wow, she was so ahead of her time.
[Guest]: And I read about some of the other women, I just sort of fell down this sort of rabbit
[Guest]: hole of research.
[Guest]: And I've read about all these other women, Anandi Bai, you know, Kadambini, Hemabati,
[Guest]: and I said, wow, they're all fascinating, I should write about these women.
[Guest]: And the other book that really influenced me, and I haven't acknowledged her in the
[Guest]: acknowledgements and I think that was a mistake on my part, because I've only now realized
[Guest]: how much she influenced me, how much her book influenced me.
[Guest]: This wonderful book by this British Indian writer called Angela Saini, it's called Inferior.
[Guest]: And she writes about how women have been completely eliminated from science and erased from science
[Guest]: because their histories have been forgotten and all the histories have been written by
[Guest]: men.
[Guest]: And, you know, if you're on Twitter a lot, and I am on Twitter a lot, I'm completely
[Guest]: addicted when I shouldn't be, you see a lot of young men saying, you know, completely
[Guest]: stupid things, things like, oh, well, men have invented everything in this world.
[Guest]: Women haven't done anything.
[Guest]: Women should be grateful to men, we have invented this, we have invented that.
[Guest]: And then they'll come out with a long list of things that people have invented.
[Guest]: The fact is that women weren't really sort of, you know, encouraged to enter science.
[Guest]: And when they did enter science, there were so many, you know, limitations and restrictions
[Guest]: placed on them.
[Guest]: And Angela talks about this in her book, how colleges banned women, how women won medals
[Guest]: and were denied them because they were given to the men.
[Guest]: And I realized I had the same stories, like one of the women in my book, Hemabati Sen,
[Guest]: she won a gold medal, and it was taken away from her, the male students protested and
[Guest]: they threatened to kill her.
[Guest]: They were like, women should not be pampered.
[Guest]: Let's just kill the women students who win medals ahead of us, we should get all the
[Guest]: medals.
[Guest]: I mean, the entitlement of men, I mean, this is just an example.
[Guest]: And she didn't want the medal because she thought it would make her a target for more
[Guest]: abuse.
[Guest]: And she wanted money because she had to support her baby son, because her husband was a complete
[Guest]: wastrel.
[Guest]: So she asked for money, and they gave her the money and took away the medal and gave
[Guest]: it to someone else.
[Guest]: And all this is in her memoir, which is an astonishing memoir.
[Guest]: So when I read this, I said, I just want to tell these stories.
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't have any lofty aims.
[Guest]: I just said, I feel like people should know about this, you know, what they do with that
[Guest]: knowledge is up to them, but they should know about this.
[Guest]: So this is what I thought.
[Guest]: So that's how it all arose.
[Amit Varma]: You know, thematically, this can like, again, I'm going back to my writing course, but I
[Amit Varma]: give an example of, you know, show don't tell where I say, you know, write in pictures,
[Amit Varma]: right, you know, make something concrete.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a beautiful example on this theme from a book called History Boys by Alan Bennett,
[Amit Varma]: where first he has an abstract sentence and then a concrete one with an image, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I read them both out and anyone listening can just see how much difference an image
[Amit Varma]: can make, where he says, quote, history is a commentary on the various and continuing
[Amit Varma]: incapabilities of men.
[Amit Varma]: What is history?
[Amit Varma]: History is women following behind with the bucket, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And that image women following behind with the bucket, you know, just tells you so much
[Amit Varma]: that if you were to do it in abstract terms, it would take you a full para to do.
[Amit Varma]: But this is such a great example of show don't tell, it tells you that they played a subsidiary
[Amit Varma]: role, it tells you they were often cleaning up the mess, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So having decided to write this book and to embark upon this book, now, obviously, the
[Amit Varma]: rabbit hole, you would have gone down on the initial easily accessible rabbit hole would
[Amit Varma]: only take you so far.
[Amit Varma]: At a certain point, you kind of find yourself going deeper.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that process like, like one of the things you pointed out is that the libraries
[Amit Varma]: in the Western countries like Britain, and so on actually had more material on these
[Amit Varma]: people, of course, some of them were educated in London, then you would find in India.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that process like a first beginning to discover what is available on their lives,
[Amit Varma]: immersing yourself in that, when does a narrative begin to emerge, like, you know, all your
[Amit Varma]: chapter titles, kind of hint at the essence of the women, the good wife, the working mom,
[Amit Varma]: the rule breaker, but at the same time, they're not simplistic, you manage to capture the
[Amit Varma]: complexity of the women through their journeys and the stories you tell, but you also get
[Amit Varma]: to their essence.
[Amit Varma]: So when do those narratives begin to form as you start researching, do you start out
[Amit Varma]: with a thesis on what the story will look like, or do you leave yourself open?
[Amit Varma]: Do you change it midway as you discover interesting things?
[Amit Varma]: Are there this crazy TIL moments, which just have you sitting back and going, my God, I
[Amit Varma]: didn't expect this.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: So yeah, coming to my research, it was really difficult.
[Guest]: I mean, this book, I mean, halfway through, I just wanted to quit and say, I can't do
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I'm just going to quit and go back to, you know, and I nearly gave up many times and
[Guest]: many things made it hard.
[Guest]: One was like, as you said, the libraries in India were not great.
[Guest]: Plus the pandemic, the pandemic hit about halfway through the research of this book
[Guest]: and all the libraries just shut down.
[Guest]: And I had no way of learning when they would open up again.
[Guest]: So I appealed to my contacts and friends in other countries.
[Guest]: And when I say contacts, people will think I'm a very well-connected person, nothing
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: I just went on Facebook and I've not been on Facebook for years because I've kind of
[Guest]: left sort of.
[Guest]: I reactivated Facebook, went on there and said, I'm writing X book.
[Guest]: Can anyone help me?
[Guest]: And people are so kind, you know, a person that I knew 15, 20 years ago in Canada, she
[Guest]: got back and said, how are you?
[Guest]: I'm in Canada.
[Guest]: I can find this book for you.
[Guest]: Let me go have a look.
[Guest]: And she went and did it and got the book for me.
[Guest]: I mean, people just have been so nice.
[Guest]: Another book I found, which was completely out of print in India, which is the memoir
[Guest]: of Hemabati Sen, which was absolutely crucial for me because she's one of my favorites.
[Guest]: I couldn't find it in India.
[Guest]: It was out of print.
[Guest]: It was a bit difficult to find.
[Guest]: So I emailed the person who had worked on the translation, a woman called, the actual
[Guest]: person who translated it, Tapan Roy Choudhury has sadly passed away.
[Guest]: It's really sad for the book because I think that he would have given me so much.
[Guest]: But Geraldine Forbes, the co-writer, she was alive.
[Guest]: So I wrote to her and she said, I will send you a PDF.
[Guest]: No problem.
[Guest]: Here's a PDF.
[Guest]: Take it.
[Guest]: Do what you want with it.
[Guest]: And so like that, I had to tap many people.
[Guest]: And the other thing is like, as I said, many of the lady doctors didn't write memoirs,
[Guest]: didn't write letters.
[Guest]: Their husbands wrote a lot of letters, but they didn't, you know.
[Guest]: So it was very much seen through the gaze of the men in their lives, which is not what
[Guest]: I wanted.
[Guest]: So I had to dig a little deeper.
[Guest]: And then halfway through the researching of this book, I moved to London, which was like
[Guest]: a complete out of the blue.
[Guest]: It didn't happen easily.
[Guest]: My husband's job in India was eliminated.
[Guest]: So we had to find another job to pay school fees and all that.
[Guest]: And he found the only one he could find was this, because he's getting a little, you know,
[Guest]: older.
[Guest]: So I had to move in a pandemic and I was actually thrilled.
[Guest]: I was like, this will be great for my book, British Library, here I come.
[Guest]: And I came and I arrived and within one month, it was shut down again, again, and it was
[Guest]: shut down.
[Guest]: And I was like, what this book is jinxed.
[Guest]: And to be honest, I don't feel like the research for this book is perfect.
[Guest]: I feel like I've done the best I can.
[Guest]: And sometimes it has to be enough.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: There is also the fact that the more research, you know, on footnotes, you add the more unreadable
[Guest]: and unwieldy the book becomes.
[Guest]: So I decided to stop at a certain time when I felt like I had enough.
[Guest]: And talking about amazing discoveries, for me, the most amazing discovery in this book
[Guest]: is one that these lady doctors had a sense of humor.
[Guest]: They weren't just these worthy pioneers who never felt any doubt, who never felt any fear.
[Guest]: And you know, even though they didn't write a lot, but what they did, I could glean that
[Guest]: they had a sense of humor.
[Guest]: For instance, Anandi Bai, I mean, I have titled my chapter, The Good Wife, simply to make
[Guest]: it, you know, easy, easy to, you know, and leap off the page.
[Guest]: But she was not just a conservative Indian wife.
[Guest]: She had a lot more to her.
[Guest]: She was a very complex woman.
[Guest]: And this is where I think these days, everybody is black and white.
[Guest]: And you know, social media sort of flattens all nuance and we are all, we are all terrible
[Guest]: or we are wonderful, but there's nothing in between.
[Guest]: And most people are a bit of both.
[Guest]: And Anandi Bai, the discovery I had with her, initially, I had a lot of trouble with her
[Guest]: because all the material on her is in Marathi.
[Guest]: She wrote her letters in Marathi.
[Guest]: So, you know, they're in Marathi, they have not been trans, then people wrote Marathi
[Guest]: biographies of her.
[Guest]: And I actually hired a translator to translate Marathi biographies.
[Guest]: I paid money and got one, but she just gave up after a few chapters and she said, no,
[Guest]: I just can't translate.
[Guest]: This translation is another difficult skill.
[Guest]: So I was like, what the hell should I do, and then suddenly I happened upon this wonderful
[Guest]: book by Meera Kusambi, who has passed away recently.
[Guest]: She is in the acknowledgements.
[Guest]: And she talked all about Anandi Bai and she said fragmented feminism.
[Guest]: She was a feminist, but not.
[Guest]: She was advanced, but not.
[Guest]: And that's all of us.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, even to, you know, 150 years later, we are all some things, but we are not.
[Guest]: And Anandi Bai had such a sense of humor, like, I mean, I actually want to read this.
[Guest]: I actually marked this because when Anandi Bai was in the US, you know, she was a Hindu.
[Guest]: At that time, all education was dominated by Christian missionaries and she absolutely
[Guest]: refused to convert and I'm not a religious person at all, but I admire this about her.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: She refused to convert and she continued with her Hindu customs and ways.
[Guest]: And because of this, she got a lot of condescension and flack from, you know, Western missionaries
[Guest]: who sort of looked down upon her and, you know, wrote about her in a very Orientalist
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: I mean, and she was so frustrated, but she had to cover that up because she was there
[Guest]: under their largesse.
[Guest]: And she wrote her husband, Gopal Rao, and she writes this really funny thing.
[Guest]: I mean, when I saw this, I was like, this is so funny.
[Guest]: There is a new fashion of wearing girdles.
[Guest]: Already the practice of tight lacing makes it impossible to breathe freely.
[Guest]: And now this fashion, if the Chinese bind their feet, it is because they're ignorant
[Guest]: and idolaters.
[Guest]: If Westerners do such things, it is because they're very advanced.
[Guest]: So you know, she could see that the way that, that whole Western gaze where, you know, what
[Guest]: Western people did was cool and what Indian people did was not cool and she could see
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And she was what?
[Guest]: She was what, like 18 years old at this time, I mean, like my children aren't this smart.
[Guest]: I can tell you that.
[Guest]: So I just feel like these women had so much, you know, humor about them.
[Guest]: The other big revelation for me was Himabati Sen because I have her entire memoir.
[Guest]: I refer to her entire memoir and it is, I think it is out print in India, but I'm sure
[Guest]: you people can still lay their hands on it somehow.
[Guest]: And it was translated from the Bangla.
[Guest]: So by Taupan Roy Choudhury and Geraldine Forbes, and it is an amazing piece of work.
[Guest]: I cannot believe that this has mostly gone unnoticed.
[Guest]: Because I just feel that this is the first time an Indian woman has been so frank.
[Guest]: I mean, Himabati was a child widow.
[Guest]: She was married at nine to a man of 45 and she came from privilege.
[Guest]: She came from a rich family in West Bengal.
[Guest]: She had all the privileges initially.
[Guest]: Then she was married to a man at nine and she didn't get any education because nobody
[Guest]: educated girls back then.
[Guest]: And she was very keen to get education, she sat in the back of the class, she kept sneaking
[Guest]: off to read, but she didn't have, you know, enough support, though her father was supportive,
[Guest]: but there was so much he could do and she had been married.
[Guest]: And eventually her husband died when she was like just a year later.
[Guest]: She just, you know, sort of completely scathing criticism of Hindu society.
[Guest]: She's like, why have you married me at nine to this 45 year old man?
[Guest]: He's dead.
[Guest]: I have no money.
[Guest]: Because in those days in West Bengal, you're a child widow, you're cast out.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: So her money was taken by her uncle, her brothers, her mother did nothing for her.
[Guest]: And after that, she was entirely on her own for the rest of her life.
[Guest]: And she married again because she thought that she would get support from her husband.
[Guest]: He turned out to be another wastrel who was into spirituality and, you know, like went
[Guest]: off to, you know, find himself leaving her, which is why she became a doctor.
[Guest]: And what is amazing about her book is her, I really identified with her because her problems
[Guest]: are so human and small.
[Guest]: She's not thinking that I must get a great education and I must become a famous and renowned
[Guest]: doctor.
[Guest]: She's thinking, tomorrow I have to feed, I have to find some money to buy some rice.
[Guest]: How will I buy rice if I don't have any money?
[Guest]: I need to find some way to make money.
[Guest]: It's very small.
[Guest]: It's very human.
[Guest]: Then she's thinking, I need to feed this child and then I have to feed the next child.
[Guest]: I really identified with her.
[Guest]: I think her memory is amazing.
[Guest]: And she's scathingly, you know, she flays her husband, he's a no good, this society
[Guest]: is no good.
[Guest]: Why am I not?
[Guest]: And at a time when women were not feminist, I mean, the feminism as such didn't exist.
[Guest]: She says, I'm getting paid less than a man for the same work.
[Guest]: Why is this?
[Guest]: You know, women doctors are just pawns in the hand of men doctors.
[Guest]: I just think she was so ahead of her time.
[Guest]: So that and obviously she wrote the entire thing in her own words.
[Guest]: There's no man shoehorning in to say, oh, this didn't happen or that.
[Guest]: And so I just sort of identified with her.
[Guest]: Oh, the last revelation was, Himamati worked in a hospital called the Campbell Medical
[Guest]: College.
[Guest]: That is now the Neel Ratan Sarkar Hospital in Calcutta.
[Guest]: And the best bit is, I discovered that my husband was born in that hospital.
[Guest]: So there was a connection.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I didn't know this until recently and, you know, until I'd already started.
[Guest]: My mother-in-law told me and my husband is, by the way, the only person in his family
[Guest]: to ever be born in a hospital.
[Guest]: He doesn't come from a rich family.
[Guest]: So he comes from rural, kind of very humble roots where everybody was born at home.
[Guest]: He's the only one who went into the hospital because he was the first child and he was
[Guest]: born in this hospital.
[Guest]: So that is sort of like a odd coincidence.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: These crazy connections of history and yeah, and one does get a sense in your book about
[Amit Varma]: how these people contain multitudes like Anandi Bai, even Tilak for that matter.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there are things to like and not like about them.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting how you contrasted Anandi Bai with Pandita Ramabai, who actually did
[Amit Varma]: convert to Christianity and the two women kind of knew each other and very different
[Amit Varma]: approaches.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you see that Anandi Bai, like in that quote, which I also noted
[Amit Varma]: about the girdle and all that, that she's not awed by, you know, the people who are
[Amit Varma]: our colonial masters.
[Amit Varma]: She's thinking independently and evaluating that and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So at that age to have that kind of incredible maturity, you wonder what kind of life she
[Amit Varma]: would have lived had she lived a full life, which is sort of so incredibly sad.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break now.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other side of the break, we'll talk more about the book.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut,
[Amit Varma]: which was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time.
[Amit Varma]: I love the freedom the form gave me and I feel I was shaped by it in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about many different things
[Amit Varma]: because I wrote about many different things.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that phase in my life ended for various reasons and now it is time to revive it.
[Amit Varma]: Only now I'm doing it through a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com, where I will write
[Amit Varma]: regularly about whatever catches my fancy.
[Amit Varma]: I'll write about some of the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else.
[Amit Varma]: So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It is free.
[Amit Varma]: Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your email inbox.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to go anywhere.
[Amit Varma]: So subscribe now for free.
[Amit Varma]: The India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Kavita Rao about her wonderful book, Lady Doctors, and indeed about the even
[Amit Varma]: more wonderful lady doctors that she has profiled in that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, let's actually now that you've also spoken about the process of talking about
[Amit Varma]: the book.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, I should point out at this point that Himabati Sen's autobiography, which
[Amit Varma]: you were speaking about, the English translation is available.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in India, at least it's available on Kindle, you know, translated by Tapan Roychoudhury
[Amit Varma]: and Geraldine Forbes.
[Guest]: Okay, that's good.
[Guest]: I think at the time it was out of print, but perhaps it's come back into print.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe because of your book, people said that, okay, Kavita's book is going to be.
[Guest]: I don't think so.
[Guest]: I'm not that important.
[Guest]: I really am not.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I love the excerpts from it.
[Amit Varma]: But what really struck me was that this lady basically wrote this memoir, put it in a trunk
[Amit Varma]: and it lay there for 80 years.
[Amit Varma]: And nobody within the family realized that, my God, this is such an amazing book.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And it's called Because I'm a Woman.
[Guest]: And nobody realized the importance of this book.
[Guest]: It was just lying there and nobody thinks that she is important.
[Guest]: I think she's very important.
[Guest]: And, you know, if I can suggest anybody reading this book, please try to pick up this book.
[Guest]: I think it's from Roli.
[Guest]: So it'll be in the footnotes.
[Guest]: Try to read it in its original because there's lots of stuff that I had to read out because
[Guest]: obviously it would make the book too long and complicated.
[Guest]: So yeah.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So let's let's get on to the book itself, and it's very interesting that you start the
[Amit Varma]: book with a quote by Anandi Bai, where she says, quote, You asked me why I should do
[Amit Varma]: what is not done by any of my sex.
[Amit Varma]: To this I can only say that society has a right to our work as individuals.
[Amit Varma]: If anything seems best for all mankind, each one of us should try to bring it about.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a very interesting kind of framing because here she is not asserting individual
[Amit Varma]: autonomy or my right to do what I want.
[Amit Varma]: She's instead framing it in the sense that it'll be good for society.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, please let me do this, you know, and this is a framing that one comes across
[Amit Varma]: in other places as well from some of your other people, though some of the doctors don't
[Amit Varma]: they talk about it in terms of their own fulfillment.
[Amit Varma]: But some of them often frame it in the context of let me do this because it's good for society
[Amit Varma]: or India needs women doctors or, you know, it'll be good for my family and all of those
[Amit Varma]: things.
[Amit Varma]: And this mindset, to a large extent, seems prevalent today as well.
[Amit Varma]: So like when you read all this, how do you how do you kind of disentangle this stuff?
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that she was incredibly perceptive in understanding what kind of narrative would
[Amit Varma]: work in her times and sort of framing everything accordingly?
[Amit Varma]: What was kind of going on there?
[Guest]: See, it's hard to plumb the depths of any person, you know, after so many years.
[Guest]: And it, you know, it's probably true that Anandi Bai said what people wanted to hear.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean that she did not also feel that way.
[Guest]: Because in another letter to Gopal Rao, Gopal Rao says, I will come to the US and let us
[Guest]: settle down there, you know, like the first green carders type of thing.
[Guest]: And Anandi Bai said, why should I settle down here?
[Guest]: I want to come back and make a difference.
[Guest]: I want to do something.
[Guest]: And, you know, you have to remember that in those days, I feel people were very idealistic.
[Guest]: I mean, when I talked to my grandmother and people who, you know, obviously, my grandmother
[Guest]: was not living in 1880s, but, you know, she was born and, you know, in 1915 or something
[Guest]: like that, she was, she still remains to the end so idealistic.
[Guest]: That generation had this feeling.
[Guest]: My father had that feeling.
[Guest]: I mean, he could have stayed on in Bahrain and earned pots and pots of money and stayed
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: People we worked with back then are still there.
[Guest]: But he had this amazing feeling that I must come back and I must contribute.
[Guest]: I guess many of us do not feel the same way now.
[Guest]: But in those days, people did feel that way.
[Guest]: Of course, not all of them felt that way.
[Guest]: Like I said earlier, Hemabati Sen's memoir is very sort of basic and her concerns are
[Guest]: very small and domestic.
[Guest]: Maybe that's why I like her so much.
[Guest]: She's not trying to impress anybody.
[Guest]: She's just saying things like, well, I decided to live on rice all day.
[Guest]: The fact is that I would love to have some fish, but I can't afford it.
[Unknown]: So end of.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, you know, it's so difficult for a Bengali to be denied fish.
[Guest]: I mean, I felt for her, I really did feel for her.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I mean, I've heard these tales from my mother-in-law also, my mother-in-law grew up
[Guest]: in a very poor family.
[Guest]: She was one of 17.
[Guest]: My mother-in-law was one of 17.
[Guest]: That was how it was in those days.
[Guest]: So I have heard those tales of hunger from her.
[Guest]: So I've identified with the thing.
[Guest]: But then again, Muthulakshmi who came later was so idealistic and, you know, and I met
[Guest]: one of Muthulakshmi's contemporaries, Dr. Vishanta, who has again sadly passed away.
[Guest]: This is the problem, you know, another person who I think would have really enjoyed this
[Guest]: book, I hope.
[Guest]: She is the chairperson of the Adyar Cancer Institute and Dr. Vishanta said, when we heard
[Guest]: Nehru, you know, give that speech, India awakes to life and freedom.
[Guest]: We were so full of idealism, we were so full of josh, we wanted to make a change and Muthulakshmi
[Guest]: was like that.
[Guest]: She was entirely full of idealism and even the chapter with Mary, you know, it may sound
[Guest]: very priggish that Mary starts her chapter with saying, you know, a person of privilege
[Guest]: should help others because maybe we don't identify with these feelings.
[Guest]: We're all just desperately trying to, you know, help ourselves in this pandemic.
[Guest]: But these women, partly, maybe they said things that people wanted to hear, like Anandi Bai
[Guest]: had to give that whole speech to get permission to go.
[Guest]: So she said certain things, but I also feel that many of them certainly felt that way.
[Guest]: Okay, maybe Rukma Bai, I feel was more of an individualist because she wanted to study
[Guest]: for herself and there's absolutely nothing wrong with that.
[Guest]: You know, she wanted to get away from this horrible, horrible man who was her husband
[Guest]: and she wanted to, you know, explore her intellectual, you know, limits because she was a very intelligent
[Guest]: woman.
[Guest]: And she did just that and managed to help a lot of people.
[Guest]: So I think the two can be sort of combined.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'll think aloud in a very sort of unstructured way.
[Amit Varma]: But from, you know, just thinking aloud, it also strikes me that when we say that people
[Amit Varma]: of a certain time are idealistic, I think the question that, you know, I can ask myself
[Amit Varma]: is what do we aspire to?
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, in modern times, there is a lot that someone like you or me or even
[Amit Varma]: a young person today who's 15 years old can aspire to because there are so many possibilities
[Amit Varma]: open.
[Amit Varma]: But if you're growing up in a very constricted world, in a very small kind of economy, you
[Amit Varma]: know, particular circumstance, what do you aspire to?
[Amit Varma]: And then I would imagine that if there is nothing practical that you can aspire to that
[Amit Varma]: really lifts you up, then it is natural to aspire to these lofty abstract things.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of idealism can become ingrained that way.
[Amit Varma]: And like in Rukmabai's case, she could at least aspire to getting out of a bad situation,
[Amit Varma]: which she manages to do.
[Amit Varma]: And like you point out that after that incredible epic court battle, which we'll talk about,
[Amit Varma]: when she does eventually go to England, one of her contemporaries writes about how she
[Amit Varma]: was not interested in politics or feminism or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: She just she had got out of the situation and she just put her nose down and got on
[Amit Varma]: with her work.
[Amit Varma]: So that's just an aside.
[Amit Varma]: And any comment on that?
[Guest]: Or shall I go to my next question?
[Guest]: You're right about Rukmabai.
[Guest]: I mean, when she returned to India, that's the last we hear of her in being involved
[Guest]: in any sort of big concerns.
[Guest]: She didn't set herself up as a feminist and as a, you know, as a sort of, you know, harbinger
[Guest]: for the Dalit community and as a sort of figurehead.
[Guest]: She just went to work.
[Guest]: And she seems to have really enjoyed her work.
[Guest]: You know, she seems to have led a really wonderful life.
[Guest]: She had a wide range of friends at a time when Indian women were not even stepping out
[Guest]: of the house because she didn't have a man telling her what to do and how to do it.
[Guest]: And she just did whatever she wanted to, more or less.
[Guest]: And I feel like you're right.
[Guest]: She just sort of it is not necessary that every lady doctor be like a figurehead or
[Guest]: an icon.
[Guest]: They can just lead their lives.
[Guest]: I feel like Hemabati did so much to kind of help women working in rural West Bengal and,
[Guest]: you know, lady doctors working in rural West Bengal by just being herself.
[Guest]: She just went to work and came back.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: You know.
[Guest]: And in her memoir, she writes very little about her work.
[Guest]: Most of her occupations are so, you know, preoccupations are so domestic, you know,
[Guest]: that's her life.
[Guest]: So again, I'm not sure if I have answered or understood the question, but no, I made
[Amit Varma]: an observation.
[Amit Varma]: It wasn't a question.
[Amit Varma]: I kind of rambled a bit as one tends to do.
[Amit Varma]: So let's talk about each of the doctors one by one.
[Amit Varma]: But before we do, just set a little bit of context of what it was like for women and
[Amit Varma]: medicine in the 18th century, like in your excellent opening chapter, the originals,
[Amit Varma]: you talk about how someone like Florence Nightingale actually didn't believe that there should
[Amit Varma]: be women doctors.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, she said women doctors, quote, have tried to be men and only succeeded in
[Amit Varma]: being third rate men, a stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And later on, there's another rant where she advises women to avoid the popular jargon
[Amit Varma]: of the time, which includes the word rights, you know, so it was actually incredibly unusual
[Amit Varma]: for even a woman in a Western country like England, to actually be a doctor like one
[Amit Varma]: of the people you wrote about, which was just so remarkable.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a rabbit hole I'm definitely going to go down into is the story of James Miranda
[Amit Varma]: Barry.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll read those lines out because I was so struck by it.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, in the mid 19th century, Dr. James Miranda Barry was one of Britain's most famous
[Amit Varma]: surgeons.
[Amit Varma]: The first military doctor was known for his foul temper, but also admired for his extensive
[Amit Varma]: work across the British Empire.
[Amit Varma]: In the Crimea, he made an enemy of Florence Nightingale, who described him as the most
[Amit Varma]: hardened creature I have ever met, a brute and a blackguard.
[Amit Varma]: Others who had met the doctor described him as a flirt and lady killer.
[Amit Varma]: In 1865, when Barry died, it was discovered that he was a woman, a woman with stretch
[Amit Varma]: marks indicating childbirth, which were noticed by the charwoman who prepared him for burial,
[Amit Varma]: drop quote, and this is a mad story, and this is a mad story of someone who wanted a woman
[Amit Varma]: who wanted to be a doctor, and the only way of doing so was to live an entire life disguised
[Amit Varma]: as a man.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about how impossible it was for women to have such aspirations in
[Amit Varma]: that time.
[Guest]: I mean, the early women doctors in the UK and the US are fascinating.
[Guest]: And I would have gone more into detail, except that I did write this book for an Indian audience
[Guest]: and I didn't want them to put off with endless sort of quotes from, you know, another country.
[Guest]: But James Barry, as you say, is a fascinating person and, you know, one can even read biographies
[Guest]: about him.
[Guest]: He was a woman pretending to be a man for years.
[Guest]: Okay, he pretended to be a man for years, for 30-40 years.
[Guest]: I mean, he got into college, I mean, sorry, University Edinburgh.
[Guest]: He went and joined the army.
[Guest]: I have no idea how he managed that.
[Guest]: To be honest, I mean, if people read this, I haven't gone into the intricate details
[Guest]: of whether he, you know, was a trans man, because, you know, that becomes another book.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And, you know, I, and it's very difficult to realise now.
[Guest]: I have gone with his biographer's view that he was just a woman who wanted to get into
[Guest]: medical school, or she was just a woman who wanted to get into medical school.
[Guest]: And therefore, he did this, what he could think of, which is that he dressed himself
[Guest]: up as a man for years.
[Guest]: And it is an amazing story.
[Guest]: I mean, like, this is what women had to do.
[Guest]: Then we come to Elizabeth Blackwell, who had such a hard time.
[Guest]: I mean, when you read about her life, like, you know, she applied to colleges in the US
[Guest]: and they thought it was a joke and admitted her as a joke.
[Guest]: And then she actually turned up in her Quaker dress and they were like, oh, you're here.
[Guest]: They actually thought it was a joke and she was denied admission to practically every
[Guest]: medical college.
[Guest]: I think she applied to some 20 and she finally got into Geneva College.
[Amit Varma]: I think you mentioned in your book that after 29 schools rejected her, the 30th accepted
[Guest]: her.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: And this was at the time when, you know, women were like, you know, if you stay unmarried
[Guest]: beyond 20, you're like some old maid and this, that.
[Guest]: And Elizabeth had this amazing journey.
[Guest]: But you're right.
[Guest]: I mean, a lot of opposition from women.
[Guest]: Elizabeth was a friend of Harriet Beecher Stowe.
[Guest]: And she asked Harriet Beecher Stowe and she said, I want to become a woman doctor.
[Guest]: What do you think?
[Guest]: Harriet Beecher Stowe, who we all think of as so progressive after Uncle Tom's Cabin
[Guest]: said, really bad idea, nobody will come to you.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: It's a bad idea.
[Guest]: And in those times, it was women were considered, oh, yes, very nurturing, very caring, very
[Guest]: sweet and kind.
[Guest]: They're fit for nursing.
[Guest]: That's the right place for men.
[Guest]: And even Florence Nightingale believed this.
[Guest]: Florence Nightingale is on record as saying a number of things against women doctors.
[Guest]: She thought they were just, as you said, they were just imitating men and becoming very
[Guest]: bad at it.
[Guest]: And there was this idea that women cannot do science.
[Guest]: They're not capable of the rigor, physics, chemistry, that is, and, you know, biology
[Guest]: that is required to be a doctor.
[Guest]: And the reason is because women were consistently denied scientific education.
[Guest]: Women both in the UK, both in the US and in India eventually were just given lessons in,
[Guest]: you know, history, English, needlework, domestic science, cookery, hygiene, things like that.
[Guest]: Things that people thought they could do.
[Guest]: They never got a foundation in maths and science.
[Guest]: And therefore, it is no surprise that when they go to college, they struggle because
[Guest]: they're like, they never learned science before.
[Guest]: Imagine just landing in, you know, a university like Mary, Mary did not get a foundation in
[Guest]: science because in Travenco in those days, the women were not being educated in science.
[Guest]: Imagine landing in London and saying, OK, you have entered the London School of Medicine
[Guest]: here.
[Guest]: Study all this physics and chemistry, which you have never studied, you know, not physics.
[Guest]: I keep saying physics, chemistry, biology.
[Guest]: And so this was the feeling then that women are just too dumb to learn science, let them
[Guest]: all become nurses.
[Guest]: And the early women doctors really had to fight against it, Elizabeth Blackwell, Elizabeth
[Guest]: Garrett Anderson, and to that extent, partly maybe because they didn't want to say that
[Guest]: a lot of them never said that women doctors are the best, women make the best doctors
[Guest]: and all that.
[Guest]: They just felt the profession should be open to them.
[Guest]: I mean, I think there's a quote from Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, I can't remember it offhand,
[Guest]: but she says, it is often said that women will understand women's ailments so much better
[Guest]: than men do.
[Guest]: This is Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, who was maybe the first British woman doctor and probably
[Guest]: the second doctor who qualified in Western medicine.
[Guest]: And she did not believe that women automatically were the best choice to treat other women.
[Guest]: She says, no one would say, for instance, that a horse or a dog would make a better
[Guest]: veterinary doctor than a man.
[Guest]: She said women doctors will understand a disease because of their knowledge and intelligence,
[Guest]: not because of any occult sympathy with the subject.
[Guest]: And she was also a very interesting woman.
[Guest]: I just wanted to keep this section short because I didn't want to put the reader off right
[Guest]: at the beginning.
[Guest]: This is worth reading about because a lot of women that at that point, they didn't understand
[Guest]: the path to take.
[Guest]: They were like, should we get colleges to open the doors for us or should we just go
[Guest]: to abroad?
[Guest]: Like a lot of British women went to France, qualified as apothecaries, which is Elizabeth
[Guest]: Garrett Anderson.
[Guest]: She qualified as an apothecary and came back.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And in that way, she managed to, you know, squeak into medicine.
[Guest]: And she didn't think that that was the wrong thing to do because she felt that no, we are
[Guest]: not at the stage where colleges will open doors for us.
[Guest]: And then we come to the Edinburgh Seven, who were, I think, amazing women and headed by,
[Guest]: you know, Sophia Jacks Blake.
[Guest]: And she actually got the University of Edinburgh and these women were admitted by the University
[Guest]: of Edinburgh, seven of them.
[Guest]: And after two years of studying, suddenly the university said, oh, well, your degrees
[Guest]: are invalid.
[Guest]: Bye.
[Guest]: You know, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: That was an effect.
[Guest]: And it blew them out because there was so much anger by men that women are entering
[Guest]: Edinburgh University and becoming doctors.
[Guest]: And amongst these seven women, there was a woman called Edith Petchy, who later became
[Guest]: the chief medical officer at the Kama Hospital in Bombay.
[Guest]: And she would mentor many Indian women.
[Guest]: And she actually topped chemistry, I think.
[Guest]: Yeah, she won the Hope Scholarship for standing in the top four in chemistry and physics.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And this made the men so angry that, you know, there was a riot at Edinburgh and, you know,
[Guest]: they pelted the women, they called them filthy names, they called them whores, they called
[Guest]: them various other names, you know, which can't be printed and, you know, that kind
[Guest]: of thing.
[Guest]: And then they eventually, they threw them out, three years, actually, yes, I say here,
[Guest]: three years of their lives, they studied in Edinburgh, topping classes, doing the very
[Guest]: difficult curriculum, and suddenly they threw them out.
[Guest]: And this is why Sophia Jacques-Blake had to start the London School of Medicine, which
[Guest]: still, you know, I went and saw the old building the other day, it's still there.
[Guest]: And along with, you know, several other women, she started the London School of Medicine,
[Guest]: which was the first, world's first medical school entirely for women.
[Guest]: And later, Rukmabai came and studied there, Mary Poonen-Lucos came and studied there.
[Guest]: So, these women helped mentor other women from the empire.
[Guest]: And we shall see that often it was a very colonialist mentoring, but nevertheless, it
[Guest]: was a mentoring.
[Guest]: So, yes, these women had an incredibly hard time and quite often some of the, you know,
[Guest]: misogyny and all was from other women as well, you know, that basically sums up their journey.
[Guest]: Incredibly difficult, met with resistance at every turn, you know, that kind of thing,
[Guest]: and begging colleges to admit them and then having to be the best in the college so that
[Guest]: people would not say, oh, you have got in because you're a woman, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely grueling.
[Amit Varma]: And your chapter also shows the full spectrum of responses that they got, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in the case of Elizabeth Blackwell, you know, you write, quote, the articles were uniformly
[Amit Varma]: patronizing.
[Amit Varma]: She was described in the Boston Medical and Surgical Journal as a pretty little specimen
[Amit Varma]: of the feminine gender.
[Amit Varma]: And the Baltimore Sun wrote that it hoped she would confine her practice to diseases
[Amit Varma]: of the heart.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's so funny, right?
[Amit Varma]: And then you later you talk about the riots and what was also kind of moving in a way
[Amit Varma]: that when the Edinburgh Seven were attacked, when all of that happened, and you speak about
[Amit Varma]: how Edith Petchy was called a whore in the streets, and that's not even the first person
[Amit Varma]: that happens to it.
[Amit Varma]: It's like almost a pattern through the book that that's how women are dealt with.
[Amit Varma]: But what I also found interesting was that some of the male students who were earlier
[Amit Varma]: skeptical, some of the male students that actually protected them, some of them with
[Amit Varma]: sticks and all of that.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: I mean, it's I don't want to say that all men were against all women.
[Guest]: It was not like that.
[Guest]: History is a lot more complicated than, you know, the binaries that we think about on
[Guest]: Twitter and all that.
[Guest]: So yes, a lot of men helped them and, you know, Elizabeth Blackwell was aided so much
[Guest]: by Dr. Webster, who was an anatomy professor.
[Guest]: And there's a lovely anecdote there, you know, when he was teaching anatomy and she was only
[Guest]: woman then, you know, he was discussing the reproductive system and, you know, that kind
[Guest]: of thing.
[Guest]: And Elizabeth Blackwell would fast for hours or maybe possibly even days, no weeks, I say
[Guest]: here, weeks.
[Guest]: She would fast.
[Guest]: And the reason is she wanted to decrease the blood to her system so that she would not
[Guest]: blush when her anatomy professor was talking about matters of the anatomy.
[Guest]: And it was and he even offered that she should sit separately for the anatomy class, but
[Guest]: she wasn't having any of that.
[Guest]: She said, no, I will sit in the class.
[Guest]: I will not blush.
[Guest]: I'll just be like a boy.
[Guest]: You know, I will be like one of the boys that you have.
[Guest]: So it is it is truly amazing the things that the women resorted to.
[Guest]: And quite often, as you say, you know, like newspapers and people on the surface welcomed
[Guest]: them, but no patients would actually come to them.
[Guest]: So Elizabeth and her sister had to, you know, work in like really difficult areas in the
[Guest]: slums and do like really difficult work in order to gain the sympathy of patients.
[Guest]: And the corresponding anecdote to that is Rukma Bhai Raut, when she first came back
[Guest]: to India, nobody would come to her.
[Guest]: So she got a pregnant sheep into her hospital and delivered the lamb in order to show people
[Guest]: that, yes, I can do this just as well as any man, you know, these are the things that women
[Guest]: had to resort to in order to get people to actually come to them.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a tangential question here before we get to the meat of the book, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and this is an interesting thought that actually goes back to something that Gautam Menon,
[Amit Varma]: the biologist told me when we did an episode on COVID.
[Amit Varma]: And we were discussing theories about why during the first wave the mortality rate among
[Amit Varma]: older people seem to be lower in India.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the theories, not his theory, but he shared this theory with me, which others
[Amit Varma]: had about this, is that is because of the survivorship bias in the sense that because
[Amit Varma]: healthcare in India is so bad, the older people get knocked off by a lot of diseases that
[Amit Varma]: they would otherwise survive in the West because they are so good.
[Amit Varma]: So the ones, the older people who do survive in India are actually much hardier in terms
[Amit Varma]: of their immune system and all that, and therefore less of them die during COVID.
[Amit Varma]: This was a theory, the survivorship bias, the stronger people have survived here.
[Amit Varma]: So therefore, they are more likely to survive against COVID as well.
[Amit Varma]: And this brought me to thinking about the survivorship bias in something like a field
[Amit Varma]: like women in medicine, that because of women getting into medicine in the 19th century
[Amit Varma]: or the early 20th century, would have had so many incredible obstacles to fight.
[Amit Varma]: So many incredible obstacles, that just to get to the point where you become a lady doctor
[Amit Varma]: as the phrase is, just to get to that point means you are remarkable, you are already
[Amit Varma]: an outlier, you know, whereas a male doctor might be some average mediocre kind of person.
[Amit Varma]: But if you're a lady doctor, just by virtue of everything you have had to do to get there,
[Amit Varma]: you are already incredibly remarkable.
[Amit Varma]: And in that sense, it is not as if you're selecting six individual stories for this
[Amit Varma]: book, which are stories of remarkable people, you know, that kind of selection bias also
[Amit Varma]: playing into it.
[Amit Varma]: But simply that anyone who beat these odds had a remarkable story of some kind or the
[Amit Varma]: other.
[Guest]: Would you say there's something to that?
[Guest]: Yes, I guess I would agree.
[Guest]: I mean, all these women were incredible women, okay.
[Guest]: And they did things that perhaps other women would not be able to do.
[Guest]: A lot of the women were very much encouraged by their fathers.
[Guest]: Some of them not so much by their husbands, but by their fathers.
[Guest]: And I think that this still continues in India today.
[Guest]: It's very much easier to support your daughter than to support your wife.
[Guest]: You know, when you actually have to pitch in with the housework, then suddenly you realize
[Guest]: that it's not so easy to support anybody.
[Guest]: So but many of their fathers were very supportive and very keen on education for the women.
[Guest]: And then, of course, when they got married, some of them were supportive and husbands
[Guest]: are supportive and some were not.
[Guest]: But yes, I would agree that these women are outliers.
[Guest]: I mean, when picking them, also, there is a bit of survivorship bias, like there was
[Guest]: very interesting women.
[Guest]: There was, you know, Ann Jagannathan, Jerusha Jirard, there's a woman called Motibhai Kapadia,
[Guest]: who was, I think, even before, you know, Rukmabai.
[Guest]: The problem was, I could not find a damn thing about these women.
[Guest]: I mean, I can't just have a chapter saying Jerusha Jirard and, you know, Ann Jagannathan
[Guest]: and nothing else in the chapter.
[Guest]: So sadly, a lot of very interesting women have been left out.
[Guest]: There was also Hilda Vaz, who started the CMC Vellore.
[Guest]: But I had to just, I had to stick to, you know, I decided that I will confine it to
[Guest]: this and I'm sure a lot of people will say, but there is my grandmother Hilda Vaz or whatever.
[Guest]: You have not covered her.
[Guest]: And I can only apologize for that.
[Guest]: I just decided to choose the ones which have the best anecdotes and, you know, who have
[Guest]: written memoirs and there's some letters and obviously some are no-brainers.
[Guest]: Anandi Bai has to be there because she is the first.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Nobody can take that away from her.
[Guest]: Rukmabai has to be there because she had the most difficult journey, most difficult challenges
[Guest]: like which the others didn't have.
[Guest]: And Kadambini has to be there because she was the first one to practice and, you know,
[Guest]: to defy the sort of colonialism of the Dufferin Front.
[Guest]: So then there were the other three, Hemabati, after reading that memoir, I said, I have
[Guest]: to put her in.
[Guest]: Nobody's heard of her.
[Guest]: Then Muthulakshmi and Mary, I chose because, you know, they were institution builders.
[Guest]: They didn't just sit back and, you know, confine it to a small practice.
[Guest]: By that time, you know, the role of women had become more important and they were supported
[Guest]: by Gandhi.
[Guest]: They were supported by Travancore Rani and therefore they decided that they will start
[Guest]: institutions.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And actually, I honestly feel you can see such a journey from Anandibai to Mary, though
[Guest]: we don't know too much about Mary because she didn't write too much about her life,
[Guest]: but still, but the difference in them is so, even actually Muthulakshmi wrote, she wrote
[Guest]: two memoirs, Muthulakshmi Reddy, the difference between Anandibai and Muthulakshmi is so marked,
[Guest]: you know, like Anandibai was very much about traditional medicine and Ayurveda and all
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: But in the time of Muthulakshmi, Muthulakshmi was very much in favor of modern medicine
[Guest]: and she started the RDR Cancer Institute.
[Guest]: So there was a change.
[Guest]: The women started to change and evolve, you know, as the book went on.
[Guest]: And I found that very interesting as well.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, in fact, you know, when you later write about Mary Punnulukos, you also talk
[Amit Varma]: about how she fought for modern medicine in the sense she wanted compulsory vaccination
[Amit Varma]: for smallpox and some of the arguments in that day almost sort of mirror the arguments
[Amit Varma]: of today.
[Amit Varma]: And she was also against homeopathy, you know, outspoken against it.
[Amit Varma]: So just such a wonderful lady and, you know, one actually wishes each of these chapters
[Amit Varma]: were, you know, expanded into books because there's so much material there.
[Amit Varma]: Let's begin by talking about Anandibai Joshi who, and her story is so rich at so many different
[Amit Varma]: levels and she's married at nine to a man of 26, Gopal Vinayak Joshi, referred to as
[Amit Varma]: Gopal Rao later on, and he's a very interesting character.
[Amit Varma]: Like at one hand, you talk about how, you know, he's a clerk in the postal department,
[Amit Varma]: but because he hasn't really done anything in his life, he kind of tries to live vicariously
[Amit Varma]: through Anandibai.
[Amit Varma]: He wants her to get educated.
[Amit Varma]: Your opening scene has him beating her because she is cooking and not studying, where in
[Amit Varma]: that time it would really be the other way around.
[Amit Varma]: But this becomes complicated later on as she becomes successful.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there are almost shades of a star is born kind of situation here.
[Amit Varma]: And I love this quote from Abaan Mukherjee in your book, and I'll read that out quote.
[Amit Varma]: Many of the reformers were deeply ambivalent about the outcome of the reforms they themselves
[Amit Varma]: advocated.
[Amit Varma]: Such deep-rooted insecurity and anxiety led many reformers, such as Anandibai's husband
[Amit Varma]: Gopal Rao Joshi, to backtrack from or vacillate between the orthodox and reformist camps,
[Amit Varma]: propagating the education of women and widow remarriage one moment and then extolling child
[Amit Varma]: marriage, the next quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then later on, you write about how, you know, after Anandibai had gone to the US,
[Amit Varma]: got her medical training, that Gopal Rao felt powerless and deserted and Anandibai would
[Amit Varma]: have to, you know, she was what you describe as quote, a constant juggling act to placate
[Amit Varma]: him and yet retain her own identity, stop quote.
[Guest]: So it's such an amazing, I mean, I'm totally indebted to Meera Kosambi's book in this regard
[Guest]: because which was translated by Abhan Mukherjee, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: See, educating a wife was a double-edged sword in those days.
[Guest]: Because of the reformist movement in Maharashtra, Ranade, Phule and, you know, all these amazing
[Guest]: men who wanted their wives to be on the same par as them, you know, people like Gopal Rao
[Guest]: would follow but not quite be able to, you know, sustain this kind of reformation of
[Guest]: wife because suddenly wife gets up and starts to think for herself and starts to talk for
[Guest]: herself and starts to give, you know, little soirees in the US and talking about herself.
[Guest]: And then suddenly I feel that, you know, Gopal Rao wanted her to be educated and he was very
[Guest]: keen that she be the first woman doctor.
[Guest]: Maybe he wanted to reflect in her glory and, you know, possibly I'm making Gopal Rao too
[Guest]: much of a caricature.
[Guest]: We can never know what went on in his head.
[Guest]: It may also be that he wanted her to, you know, live up to her potential.
[Guest]: We can't really paint him in black or white.
[Guest]: But what we do know is that after she went to the US and then she started writing him
[Guest]: letters, he started getting more and more insecure like there's an incident where she
[Guest]: was not wearing the Maharashtrian saree.
[Guest]: She was decided to drape her saree in a different way simply because the winters in Philadelphia
[Guest]: were so cold.
[Guest]: And then he writes to her, why have you draped your, I mean, I'm not quoting exactly, but
[Guest]: this the gist is why have you wearing your saree in this way, it's very immodest.
[Guest]: And then she writes a placatery letter to him because she had to, you know, she had
[Guest]: to placate her husband because in those days you can't be running around without a husband.
[Guest]: You had to have the husband to show that you're a pure good woman, you know.
[Guest]: So she writes to him and she coaxes him just like almost like a mother does with a child.
[Guest]: No, no, no, no.
[Guest]: I'm trying my best.
[Guest]: I'm only dressed this way because it's cold.
[Guest]: But you know, I'm doing my best and this and that.
[Guest]: And every time she keeps writing these letters to him saying, you know, no, no, don't get
[Guest]: angry.
[Guest]: Then eventually Gopal Rao lands up in the US and he is roundly and he talks a bit too
[Guest]: much because, you know, he feels very, you know, he doesn't like to be obligated to missionaries
[Guest]: for Anandibai's education.
[Guest]: And he is not a big fan of missionaries and he's not a big fan of evangelism.
[Guest]: And while he was a very difficult and maybe slightly crazy person, what he says also was
[Guest]: correct.
[Guest]: He was not in favor of all this Orientalism where they're putting pressure on Anandibai
[Guest]: to change her religion and, you know, be this way.
[Guest]: The other thing is that Gopal Rao was very much in favor of early marriages and Anandibai
[Guest]: is also on the record as having spoken out in favor of early marriages, which completely
[Guest]: astonished her sect there.
[Guest]: They're like, this woman seems so advanced and then, you know, her husband arrives and
[Guest]: she's in favor of early marriages.
[Guest]: And one can't really blame Anandibai for that because everything that she got in life was
[Guest]: through her early marriage.
[Guest]: And she and Gopal Rao were looking at the West from a Indian sort of view where they
[Guest]: were seeing, you know, what they considered as debauchery.
[Guest]: I mean, very mild by today's standards, but in those days they were like, oh, you know,
[Guest]: women are not getting married until late and they're wandering around doing this and that
[Guest]: and with nobody, you know, family and this.
[Guest]: And so they looked at it from the view that we do not want all this in India.
[Guest]: We are keen on early marriages and we are also keen on education of women.
[Guest]: Women can get educated after they get married.
[Guest]: And this is, till today, I think this is quite a common view in India.
[Guest]: I mean, it's like people still say to their daughters who if they want to study abroad
[Guest]: or in another city, they say, first you get married, then you ask permission from your
[Guest]: mother-in-law, then you can study.
[Guest]: So this is not a very unusual view.
[Guest]: And he came there and he started talking all kinds of nonsense about early marriages and
[Guest]: trying to grab the spotlight.
[Guest]: And even after Anandi bhai passed away, he staged this Pune tea party, which I talk about
[Guest]: in the book.
[Guest]: So I do feel that he wanted a bit of her fame.
[Guest]: And I feel that if Anandi bhai had lived, she might have pulled away from him at some
[Guest]: point and she might have got more independence and pulled away from him and done things on
[Guest]: her own.
[Guest]: But as it was, she had to kind of, you know, keep him sweet so that she could continue
[Guest]: doing what she did.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, she seems to be a woman of both tremendous will and tremendous pragmatism and kind of
[Amit Varma]: always balancing the two.
[Amit Varma]: I want to read out a bit of that letter because, you know, he had berated her for sort of not
[Amit Varma]: covering her shoulders and bosom adequately, as you put it.
[Amit Varma]: So she wrote back, quote, in your letter you have critiqued the blouse I wore in the photograph,
[Amit Varma]: but I promise you, I never thought of it.
[Amit Varma]: I am sorry it made you unhappy.
[Amit Varma]: The putter of the Pitambar fell off my shoulder, not because of carelessness, but inadvertently.
[Amit Varma]: I was not aware of it, nor was anyone else.
[Amit Varma]: That is why the photograph was taken as it was, stop quote, you know, just thinking of
[Amit Varma]: Gopal Rao and again from a distance one never knows and people contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: But it also sort of strikes me as a common danger that we all have to consider even within
[Amit Varma]: ourselves that sometimes we do things because in a sense we are posturing perhaps to ourselves
[Amit Varma]: that we are a certain kind of person.
[Amit Varma]: It is easy for somebody to want to build an image of himself as someone who stands for
[Amit Varma]: women's liberation and look, I educated my child bride and she is now a doctor and all
[Amit Varma]: of that.
[Amit Varma]: But then everything, all the motivation for that is coming from your self image.
[Amit Varma]: And you're not really, you're looking at the other person as a means to an end, not as
[Amit Varma]: an end in themselves, right?
[Amit Varma]: And when that other person has an identity, when their pallu happens to fall a little
[Amit Varma]: bit and you know, whatever, then suddenly you can't stand that, you can't stand that
[Amit Varma]: independence or that autonomy.
[Amit Varma]: It's like a clash between the abstract conception of yourself and the actual sort of the concrete
[Amit Varma]: manifestation of that, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: Is this something that strikes you when you look at these characters that, you know, with
[Amit Varma]: these women, we clearly get that they are what they are, right?
[Amit Varma]: They're fighting so hard and what you get is in a sense kind of what you see, even when
[Amit Varma]: Anandi Bai is kind of being diplomatic and hedging, you can make out exactly what she's
[Amit Varma]: doing.
[Amit Varma]: She's not being dishonest to herself in a way, but many of the men, you know, in these
[Amit Varma]: stories, one senses that they are just, they are being dishonest to themselves at some
[Amit Varma]: point.
[Guest]: There are so many contradictions and so on.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I'm sorry, I'm looking down.
[Guest]: It's because I'm looking for that passage by, you know, where Abaan Mukherjee says that,
[Guest]: you know, all these men educated their women, but then they, you know, they, they just felt
[Guest]: like every time the women made an independent decision, then they would be like, huh.
[Guest]: And this is exactly what happened with later with Rukma Bai.
[Guest]: She decided that, yeah, well, I'm going to do X.
[Guest]: And everybody rose up in arms when they were, you know, they contrasted Anandi Bai to Rukma
[Guest]: Bai, you know, all the popular press, Tilak Kesari and Namaratha, they all said that,
[Guest]: you know, this is a good woman and this is what a bad woman looks like because she has
[Guest]: decided to follow her own path.
[Guest]: And to be honest, we all posture, I mean, I'm sure I posture endlessly on Twitter or
[Guest]: wherever.
[Guest]: We all posture and it is one of the things, especially in parenthood, that you think you
[Guest]: want your child to be independent and have your own views.
[Guest]: And then your child runs out and says, I will get a tattoo.
[Guest]: That is the best way I can express my independent view.
[Guest]: And then you're like, hello, I didn't mean like that.
[Guest]: I mean, like this.
[Guest]: And it is a very painful process.
[Guest]: And in some ways, I have a lot of sympathy with Gopal Rao because he was one of the early,
[Guest]: he didn't have any peers.
[Guest]: He didn't have a, you know, a men's supportive society where he can go and, you know, talk
[Guest]: with all these guys and say, well, my wife has done this and my wife has done that.
[Guest]: So in that way, I feel like I do sympathize because I struggle with this every day.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm like, I want people in my family to be independent.
[Guest]: Then they do something independent and I'm like, but why did you do this?
[Guest]: Why didn't you do what I said?
[Guest]: So it's a, I think every human being in the world feels this way.
[Guest]: It's like, you know, even those who are not parents, you will be like, I want my mother
[Guest]: to do this.
[Guest]: And then she does it and then she does something else.
[Guest]: And then you're like, but I wanted her to do this.
[Guest]: So it's that desire for control is always there.
[Guest]: And I think Gopal Rao, you know, he died completely alone and, you know, in poverty and with no
[Guest]: attention.
[Guest]: And I feel he must have felt a little sad that he wanted to do so many radical things
[Guest]: and through Anandibhai, who was sort of like, I won't say his puppet, but in a way like
[Guest]: his creation.
[Guest]: And nobody recognized him at the end and, you know, he just sort of died alone and that
[Guest]: kind of thing.
[Guest]: So I do feel sorry for him.
[Guest]: And there is a lot of posturing by the men, later chapters also, it's hard to exactly
[Guest]: see what they're thinking because nobody has actually sat down and said, I've just seen
[Guest]: my wife go out to her practice and what does she think of herself?
[Guest]: No, this will not do and that kind of thing.
[Guest]: But I guess it's the constant push and pull in India.
[Guest]: Like now we all want our daughters to become doctors, but perhaps we don't want them to
[Guest]: become something else which they may want to become, you know, so that's that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: All very wise words.
[Amit Varma]: Talking of the sort of dramatic event in Anandibhai's life and, you know, one of the most striking
[Amit Varma]: things about her story is that she basically died at 22, right?
[Amit Varma]: So, and when she was 18, there is a striking event where her husband kind of, I think begins
[Amit Varma]: to set these events into motion where he organizes an auditorium.
[Amit Varma]: So he can explain to the local community that why she is going abroad and please allow her.
[Amit Varma]: But she says that she wants to speak instead and she speaks about how it will help society
[Amit Varma]: and she makes a case and, you know, please let me break caste rules and go abroad and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And she does that.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting thing about her is that while some of the other doctors you speak
[Amit Varma]: about are not kindly looked upon, in fact, the way Rukmabai is treated is just horrendous
[Amit Varma]: and we'll come to that.
[Amit Varma]: But with Anandibhai, after a point in time, it's almost as if she is accepted and valorized
[Guest]: also.
[Guest]: She is a bit valorized.
[Amit Varma]: Definitely.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Tilak offers a hundred rupees because she becomes like a symbol of Marathi pride
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not all crazy.
[Amit Varma]: And then she decides to return, like Gopal Rao wants to stay on in America and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps because she has seen the kind of nonsense he can get up to, she decides
[Amit Varma]: to come back.
[Amit Varma]: But she decides to come back because her logic is that, you know, there's already a glut
[Amit Varma]: of women doctors in the US and they're not getting jobs.
[Amit Varma]: So what's the point?
[Amit Varma]: Let's go back to India.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, she says, why leave a full plate to go begging elsewhere, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a bit about this phase.
[Amit Varma]: What else can you glean about her?
[Amit Varma]: And if there had to be a counterfactual that she has come back and, you know, some of the
[Amit Varma]: doctors later in the book go on to do things within the legal system, they go on to become
[Amit Varma]: legislators, they found colleges, they found institutions, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And with Anandi bhai, there is almost as someone reading a story, you're feeling that you've
[Amit Varma]: been cheated, that she's gone at 22.
[Amit Varma]: What was your sense of what kind of woman she was or would have gone on to become?
[Guest]: See one thing is that she was privileged, I mean, she was a Brahmin and all the press
[Guest]: about her, like, you know, Kesri says, it is indeed wonderful that a Brahmin lady has
[Guest]: proved to the world that the great qualities, perseverance, unselfishness, undaunted courage
[Guest]: and an eager desire to serve one's country do exist in the so-called weaker sex.
[Guest]: So they did valorize her and her devotion to her husband was constantly noted in all
[Guest]: the press, you know, although Anandi bhai was so young, her undaunted courage and devotion
[Guest]: to her husband were unparalleled, wrote the Jnana Chakshu paper.
[Guest]: So like, you know, in that way, she, you know, she was valorized.
[Guest]: At the same time, I forgot to mention, I think we haven't mentioned this so far that Anandi
[Guest]: bhai lost her child very early and she had a baby and before she went to the US and the
[Guest]: baby died and she says that I don't think it affects the father so much, but it affects
[Guest]: the mother and while she doesn't write about it much, I have a feeling and I'm only theorizing
[Guest]: here that this did affect her, I do not imagine that there will be any mother who is not affected
[Guest]: by the loss of a child and she never had a child after that because her health was so
[Guest]: damaged and I have a feeling that this really did affect her desire to come back to India
[Guest]: and I give her the benefit of the doubt.
[Guest]: I think if she had lived, she would have helped, you know, at least, you know, pregnant women
[Guest]: and all that, maybe not with super modern medicine, but with whatever medicine she did
[Guest]: learn and whatever medicine she could, which would still have been a help.
[Guest]: I just feel that way.
[Guest]: The other thing that you notice with Anandi bhai and Gopal Rao is I wanted to bring this
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: I don't know if I have adequately is that like many people married at a very young age,
[Guest]: he was a friend also because in by modern standards, he's an abusive jerk, but by those
[Guest]: standards and I know this because like my paternal grandmother was married at 11, okay,
[Guest]: and that was the way it was for women back in those days and she sort of grew up with
[Guest]: her husband and he was a friend and in Anandi bhai's letters, you see this, like she writes
[Guest]: very excitedly to Gopal Rao, I wore my red Pitambar saree, I mean, I can't imagine writing
[Unknown]: that to my husband, he'll be like, yeah, I don't really care, I mean, what do you want,
[Guest]: what is there and like, you know, but the way she writes it, she's very excited because
[Guest]: she's like sort of seeking his approval because they've grown up together and he's her mentor,
[Guest]: friend, philosopher, guide and she's writing to him and I found that very endearing because
[Guest]: it's not that she hated him all the time.
[Guest]: It's not like that.
[Guest]: It was a very complex relationship, okay, and you know, it is very, she was really sort
[Guest]: of a very complex woman.
[Guest]: She was not just a privileged good Brahmin wife, let's put it that way, there was more
[Guest]: to her than that.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, I found those snapshots from her letters really fascinating because there is
[Amit Varma]: a sense of anger and resentment, there is a sense of longing, there is a sense that
[Amit Varma]: oh, you're really missing somebody, there is this warmth and there is kind of all of
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: Where are these letters, you know, are there anywhere in the public domain where people
[Guest]: can read them?
[Guest]: I got all these from Meera Kosambi's book, okay, where she has translated them all from
[Guest]: Marathi.
[Guest]: Okay, so clearly I don't know how to read Marathi and I could not, you know, easily
[Guest]: find a translator.
[Guest]: So I have used her book as a very important source and I have footnoted it.
[Guest]: So I hope that it's kind of okay, but you can read a lot of these translated version
[Guest]: of these letters in Meera Kosambi's book, A Fragmented Feminism.
[Guest]: It's an expensive book and maybe not easily accessible to everybody.
[Guest]: So yeah, it's an academic kind of book.
[Guest]: I mean, that was my aim behind this book to take all these incredibly expensive, but obviously
[Guest]: fantastic academic books, Meera Kosambi, you know, all these other people who have written
[Guest]: about these women and make it accessible to people so that they can read this, you know.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And another thing I was struck by where you describe her routine while she's studying
[Amit Varma]: in college and you write quote, on a typical day, she rested seven to eight hours, spent
[Amit Varma]: two hours on letter writing, an hour and a half on meals, half an hour on visits, half
[Amit Varma]: an hour on a toilet and the rest of the time on lectures and studies, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I was struck by that little bit there, spent two hours on letter writing and the
[Amit Varma]: fact that she got seven letters a day.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember even when I left home in the early nineties and all that, I would write
[Amit Varma]: physical letters to my parents and my mother would send me back these inland letter thingies
[Amit Varma]: and you know, saying things like, you know, I hope you're bathing enough and this and
[Amit Varma]: that and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And there's a certain charm to that because the act of sitting down and physically writing
[Amit Varma]: a letter almost means you're sharing a part of yourself, giving a part of yourself with
[Amit Varma]: the person you are writing to, you're giving them that much importance that you're actually
[Amit Varma]: writing a physical letter.
[Amit Varma]: And I think in modern times, some of that is a little bit lost where everything is cursory
[Amit Varma]: WhatsApp messages, or you just, you know, the level of communication has become much
[Amit Varma]: more shallow and transient.
[Amit Varma]: And I think it also perhaps changes us as people that instead of sitting down and writing
[Amit Varma]: a long letter in longhand and all that, I'm just sending a quick WhatsApp message and
[Amit Varma]: whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And it changes the kind of thinking you do, it changes the kind of communication, it changes
[Amit Varma]: relationships.
[Amit Varma]: Is this something you've thought about because you've kind of lived through the same years
[Amit Varma]: as me, right?
[Guest]: So?
[Guest]: Yes, I used to write a lot of letters.
[Guest]: I had a pen pal.
[Guest]: I actually had a pen pal in Indiana, and she used to write to me all about her life in
[Guest]: India, and I used to write to her about, you know, what I'm doing in India and whatnot.
[Guest]: And I guess I do miss those letter writing days, because I used to write a lot of letters.
[Guest]: Okay, a huge number of letters.
[Guest]: I wrote so many letters to my husband, you know, in our early years of our courtship
[Guest]: and this and that.
[Guest]: And I do miss that.
[Guest]: But I don't think I'll go back to it.
[Guest]: It's like, you know, the other problem is like, social media, those of us who are very
[Guest]: active on social media, I think our brains are just completely a mess and, you know,
[Guest]: jangled up.
[Guest]: I can see the difference in the way my husband's on any social media.
[Guest]: He's not even on Facebook.
[Guest]: He does.
[Guest]: He's just like the ghost who walks.
[Guest]: He doesn't exist, except, you know, and he hates social media.
[Guest]: He's very different from me.
[Guest]: And occasionally he comes on and reads my Twitter feed, and then he says, you all have
[Guest]: too much time on your hands, and he goes back to doing something else.
[Guest]: And his level of concentration is so much better than mine.
[Guest]: I mean, I read some 50 times more than him.
[Guest]: I read this.
[Guest]: I read that.
[Guest]: I know everything that's going on.
[Guest]: I know all the social media fights, but I have no focus or concentration, and his concentration
[Guest]: is so much better.
[Guest]: He can read a book and he will take ages to read it, but he will tell you everything that's
[Guest]: in the book and, you know, with a really good commentary.
[Guest]: And I do find that social media makes me very jangled and my mind a mess.
[Guest]: But what can I say?
[Guest]: I'm not going to give it up.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm not sitting here saying I'm going to go off Twitter and become a better person.
[Guest]: No, I will be on Twitter and I'll be a worse person, but I'm continuing.
[Amit Varma]: So we are both, I think, two addicts talking to each other and in full acknowledgement
[Amit Varma]: of our addiction.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's a great book by Cal Newport called Deep Work, where he kind of speaks
[Amit Varma]: exactly about this.
[Amit Varma]: Basically, what happens is that what you need to do anything seriously, including writing,
[Amit Varma]: is you need a state of deep concentration.
[Amit Varma]: But every time you're distracted, it takes about 15 to 20 minutes to get back to that
[Amit Varma]: state of concentration.
[Amit Varma]: And if like me, and like, I suppose you, if you're looking at your phone all the time
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, then you're constantly the distractions are so many, especially through
[Amit Varma]: your smartphone, that you're constantly in a state of shallow concentration and it becomes
[Amit Varma]: really difficult to get deep.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess your husband's way is something like Neil Stephenson, like the writer of Cryptonomicon
[Amit Varma]: and so many great books.
[Amit Varma]: What Stephenson does is he doesn't even have an email account, forget social media.
[Amit Varma]: So there is zero chance of distraction.
[Amit Varma]: You just sit and you write and you engage with the real world as it is.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I think the internet is a massive net benefit.
[Amit Varma]: But I also get the sort of the allure of being able to get away from it.
[Guest]: But also, I should say to defend my addiction to social media is that unlike many writers,
[Guest]: possibly, I'm not an introvert.
[Guest]: I'm not a person who goes around saying, well, I hate people, I don't meet anybody, I've
[Guest]: just want to be with my books.
[Guest]: I love books, but I like meeting people.
[Guest]: I am not an introvert.
[Guest]: And these days, it's become very cool to say that you're an introvert.
[Guest]: And my husband is a true introvert.
[Guest]: He really, really doesn't want to meet anybody.
[Guest]: And perhaps it's a function of his work where he's always in meetings.
[Guest]: But I find writing an extremely lonely business, especially writing books.
[Guest]: And Twitter is my sort of internet water cooler.
[Guest]: And lots of people have told me, including, you know, people like my agent and all that,
[Guest]: they're like, why do you spend so much time on Twitter, imagine what you could do with
[Guest]: that time.
[Guest]: And I'm like, yeah, but the thing is that Twitter gives me that little interest and
[Guest]: some interaction with some human being.
[Guest]: And then I go back to my solitary, you know, work plodding on.
[Guest]: So I don't feel that I'm going to give up social media anytime soon, I may reduce the
[Guest]: time I spend on it, I may restrict the things I talk about on social media, there are a
[Guest]: lot of things I never talk about.
[Guest]: I find that there is a tendency to suddenly start 20 tweet threads about things that you
[Guest]: know nothing about absolutely nothing, but you will be like pontificating for hours and
[Guest]: hours.
[Guest]: And, you know, and I don't want to get into all that because I don't know so much about
[Guest]: a lot of things.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, the worst aspects of Twitter can be shallow and toxic, but the best aspects
[Amit Varma]: are that you can reach out to some really interesting people and curate feeds for yourself
[Amit Varma]: where you're getting incredible gyan from people who would otherwise never know who
[Guest]: you are.
[Guest]: So yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: I totally agree.
[Guest]: So not going to give it up anytime soon.
[Amit Varma]: So let's let's move on to the second of your fascinating doctors, which is Kadamini Ganguly,
[Amit Varma]: who is also, by the way, as you point out, called a whore in 1891 by a publication called
[Amit Varma]: Bongo Bashi.
[Amit Varma]: And later on, another publication called the Indian Messenger says, quote, the maintenance
[Amit Varma]: of female virtue is incompatible with liberty, stop good, which is something I think people
[Amit Varma]: would some people would say today as well, and not just for women.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about Kadamini Ganguly, because she's also an incredibly fascinating
[Amit Varma]: character, also privileged in many ways, but at the same time has, you know, a massive
[Amit Varma]: fight on her hands to kind of get where she gets.
[Guest]: So Kadamini was very, she maybe suffered a bit by being between two very interesting
[Guest]: and dramatic women, Anandi Bai before her, who was the first and Rukma Bai after her,
[Guest]: who was the third.
[Guest]: And there is always a lot of confusion about who was the first woman doctor, blah, blah,
[Guest]: blah.
[Guest]: And as I say in my book, I find these kind of debates a bit unnecessary, because it doesn't
[Guest]: matter.
[Guest]: The fact is, they all had their own challenges, and they were all incredible women.
[Guest]: But if we are going to be strictly accurate, Kadamini was the first to practice before
[Guest]: Rukma Bai.
[Guest]: And it's often said that Rukma Bai was before Kadamini, but that is not true.
[Guest]: And you know, if you just look at the facts, and Kadamini was a very quiet woman, I think
[Guest]: that's the sense I get of her, there's very little written about her.
[Guest]: And she had eight children, though some accounts say seven, I think one died.
[Guest]: And she didn't have much time to write about herself.
[Guest]: She was busy looking after these eight children and struggling to start, be the first Indian
[Guest]: woman to practice.
[Guest]: So whatever we have of her is from other accounts, you know, and obviously the chapter on her
[Guest]: suffers because of that, but I don't know what I'm supposed to do about that, really,
[Guest]: I just have to move on.
[Guest]: So Kadamini's main struggle was, and she was a Brahmo.
[Guest]: And she was very lucky in that the Brahmo movement at that time was working very hard
[Guest]: for the education of women.
[Guest]: And her husband was a Brahmo and helped her greatly.
[Guest]: And by all accounts, they did have a good marriage, I tried to find some sense of more
[Guest]: about their marriage, and there's not much written, but by all accounts, he did try to
[Guest]: educate her in every way.
[Guest]: And he was different among the Brahmos in that he believed that women should be educated
[Guest]: in science.
[Guest]: So she had a decent education as compared to the other women.
[Guest]: And she was studied at Bethune College, and then she went, then her struggle began because
[Guest]: Calcutta Medical College did not admit women.
[Guest]: And she really fought for that.
[Guest]: And that really changed lives for many of women in a very discreet way.
[Guest]: She was just working hard and she sent various letters and eventually Calcutta Medical College
[Guest]: admitted her.
[Guest]: And then even with that degree, she could not get the respect that she was due.
[Guest]: She could not get patients to come and therefore she went to Edinburgh and I could not find
[Guest]: a single mention of her in Edinburgh.
[Guest]: I don't know where it's gone.
[Guest]: Maybe it'll turn up.
[Guest]: But I have to admit that I could not find any mention of her in Edinburgh.
[Guest]: I contacted Edinburgh and they said, yes, we know that she was on the Rolls-Royce dates.
[Guest]: We don't have any information of her.
[Guest]: So I mean, she was only there a year and she got like, you know, a sort of a triple degree
[Guest]: and she had to fight against the Dufferin Fund.
[Guest]: And this is where this book has been so revelatory for me because, you know, one of the journalists
[Guest]: who interviewed me, I think he asked me a very good question.
[Guest]: He was like, have you thought about, you know, global hegemonies in feminism?
[Unknown]: And initially when I read that question, I didn't understand it.
[Guest]: So I read it some three, four times and then I realized what he meant, which is what I've
[Guest]: said in the book.
[Guest]: Like so many of these women, they had to fight against, you know, things that were ostensibly
[Guest]: a great thing.
[Guest]: Like Kandamini had to fight against the Dufferin Fund, which was a fund started by Harriet
[Guest]: Dufferin to bring more women doctors to India and to bring medical facilities to India.
[Guest]: And that was a very good idea.
[Guest]: But what they actually did was bring a lot of European women, the ones who could not
[Guest]: find jobs in the Europe and in the UK, and they brought them all in here and set them
[Guest]: up in, you know, West Bengal without any local language knowledge, without any knowledge
[Guest]: of, you know, the customs of people and set them up and said, hello, carry on practicing.
[Guest]: It was hailed as a wonderful thing.
[Guest]: But as I see in my book, the Dufferin Fund was a mixed blessing because they did not
[Guest]: decide to train Indian women.
[Guest]: They decided that, oh, Indian women are, you know, they are subject to the Pardhanisheen
[Guest]: system and they're in Zenanas, they can't study and people will not go to Indian women.
[Guest]: Even other Indian women will not go to Indian women.
[Guest]: And Kandamini fought against all this.
[Guest]: And the few letters she writes, she says that Indian women are just as capable as any other
[Guest]: women.
[Guest]: And slowly over the years, and especially after getting a foreign degree, there was
[Guest]: change.
[Guest]: And then she got a job under the Dufferin Fund and she was hailed by Florence Nightingale,
[Guest]: who I think by that time had changed her mind, clearly seems to have changed her mind after
[Guest]: seeing so many women doctors.
[Guest]: And she managed to practice on her own, okay.
[Guest]: And in which in those days was like a huge thing and eventually entered public life,
[Guest]: joined the Indian National Congress, you know, when Gandhi called for more women to enter
[Guest]: the political movement.
[Guest]: So she was an amazing woman, but she was a very quiet woman.
[Guest]: There's so little about her.
[Guest]: I wish maybe somebody might come forth and we can do a little addition to the book if
[Guest]: somebody has heard of her.
[Guest]: So yeah.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And also just to place the times in context, you know, it's okay at one point to posture
[Amit Varma]: about how men and women should be equal.
[Amit Varma]: But that abstract sentiment also needs a concrete commitment to something like education.
[Amit Varma]: Like at one point you give context by saying, quote, the Brahmos believed that husbands
[Amit Varma]: and wives should have shared interests, which given how uneducated most Indian women were,
[Amit Varma]: was almost impossible at the time.
[Amit Varma]: An article titled Ardhangini in the Bornobodinipotrika stated, quote, when the husband is busy determining
[Amit Varma]: the distance between the sun and other constellations, the wife is busy measuring the dimensions
[Amit Varma]: of her pillowcases.
[Amit Varma]: When the husband thinks about the stars and planets in the sky, the wife is then at the
[Amit Varma]: kitchen determining the reflexes and speed of the cock, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, her husband comes across as the one actual husband in this book
[Amit Varma]: who you kind of feel, you know, there are no mixed feelings.
[Amit Varma]: He just seems like a good guy.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, when the marriage happens, she's 21, he's 39, he's got three kids, but he's
[Amit Varma]: so incredibly supportive, like both her father and her husband are just so incredibly supportive
[Amit Varma]: all the way, not just posturing, but also really, you know, putting their hearts into
[Guest]: supporting their wives.
[Guest]: Actually, I mean, Dwarkanath Ganguly, he did say things like in his writings, and I haven't
[Guest]: I have just acknowledged them, but I haven't gone too much into detail.
[Guest]: In his writings, he does say that, you know, women should be educated so that their husbands
[Guest]: won't go to prostitutes in order to sustain their interest.
[Guest]: But this was the general feeling and then even amongst the Brahmos, okay, so there was
[Guest]: a very strong Puritan streak, the basic, like I say, the objective of education was to make
[Guest]: women better wives and mothers, so that they can, you know, maybe good mothers and, you
[Guest]: know, not have their children die from lack of care, and also to discourage husbands from
[Guest]: a life of vice, visiting prostitutes, drinking and smoking, because in those days, many of
[Guest]: the husbands were like 20 years older than their wives or 25 years, and therefore the
[Guest]: husbands would go to courtesans or prostitutes in order to get some kind of intellectual
[Guest]: stimulation, which they were not getting from their nine year old wife whom like, you know,
[Guest]: they have just been landed with.
[Guest]: So while I say that, yes, we should say that women should be educated for their own sakes,
[Guest]: but this was too much of a radical idea at the time.
[Guest]: At the time, they were just educating women in order to make her like, you know, like
[Guest]: a sort of like a on a pedestal, like, you know, good wife and mother and this kind of
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: But still, you know, Dwarkanath was very advanced for the time.
[Guest]: So you can't really judge people of that time by the standards of today, you're never going
[Guest]: to arrive at a, you know, resolution.
[Guest]: So and when Kadambini was called a whore by the Bangabashi editor, she was called a whore
[Guest]: in print by, you know, Indian messenger and the Indian messenger, like you said, said
[Guest]: published an article arguing that giving women opportunities for education would make them
[Guest]: unchaste.
[Guest]: And it is so incongruous because by this time, Kadambini had some eight children, where did
[Guest]: she have the time to be unchaste, she was just physically, I mean, she was like, you
[Guest]: know, she was doing her embroidery, her work and looking after her eight children.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And Dwarkanath immediately kind of filed a suit for defamation.
[Guest]: He was like the knight in shining armor kind of thing.
[Guest]: And the Indian messenger sort of, you know, changed its tune.
[Guest]: But I mean, this is like an incident, you can have eight children and still, still somebody
[Guest]: will think that you have the time to be unchaste, I mean, most of us are like just struggling
[Guest]: to just carry on, we have no time to be unchaste or anything like that, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And also there's nothing wrong with being quote-unquote unchaste.
[Guest]: No, it's fine.
[Guest]: But I mean, why they like kind of, you know, brand her as, oh, you know, because she is
[Guest]: a doctor, she'll have more opportunities to leave the home.
[Guest]: That was their logic.
[Guest]: She will leave the home.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Unchaste is the most convenient pejorative.
[Amit Varma]: You also write about how, you know, when Dwarkanath sued the bongobashi editor Mahesh
[Amit Varma]: Chandrapal was found guilty, fined hundred rupees and sentenced to six months imprisonment.
[Amit Varma]: I think he did the right thing.
[Guest]: You know, some people have asked me whether he was just trying to grab her limelight.
[Guest]: I don't see it that way, because I think he had to step up and set a precedent, you know.
[Guest]: And I think possibly of all the men here, you know, he possibly might be the most supportive
[Guest]: and you know, of him.
[Guest]: But of course, we have no idea whether he ever, you know, did the cooking or, you know,
[Guest]: and wash the dishes, probably didn't do any of that, men didn't in those days.
[Guest]: So in the 19th century, you are expecting so much.
[Guest]: You can't really, you know, expect all that.
[Amit Varma]: So I have a note about here called Poni and Politics, which both of which come from this
[Amit Varma]: particular paragraph.
[Amit Varma]: I'll just read out quote.
[Amit Varma]: What does survive is a picture of a woman initially much sought after by the rich and
[Amit Varma]: famous in 1895, Kadambini treated the queen mother of the royal family of Nepal and apparently
[Amit Varma]: saved her life.
[Amit Varma]: In return, along with gifts of money and jewellery, she was given a pony, which her children and
[Amit Varma]: grandchildren greatly enjoyed playing with.
[Amit Varma]: However, Kadambini was also gradually becoming responsible, becoming conscious of her social
[Amit Varma]: responsibility.
[Amit Varma]: She treated Pardhanasheen women, women who observed rigid rules of seclusion, and would
[Amit Varma]: later join politics, stop quote, and she actually became the first woman to speak at the Indian
[Amit Varma]: National Congress annual meeting, the Congress that they had, she spoke in the sixth session,
[Amit Varma]: but she kind of doesn't really play a big part in politics after that.
[Amit Varma]: But she got that far.
[Guest]: She got that far.
[Guest]: And in those days, that was a lot to actually go up and speak was a lot, you know, and and
[Guest]: by that time she was getting older and all that kind of thing.
[Guest]: So I think she was an amazing woman is just that as compared to some of the others is
[Guest]: not enough material.
[Guest]: So she maybe doesn't stand out, okay, but she certainly deserves to be remembered.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah I mean, if you fought and won those battles, you are, in a sense, amazing by default and
[Amit Varma]: the word amazing seems an understatement when you talk about the next woman, Rukma Bairaut.
[Amit Varma]: So the rule breaker, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about her because this woman is completely at a different level.
[Guest]: She's at a different level.
[Guest]: And she had the biggest challenge of anybody.
[Guest]: And you know, I must mention here, and I hope it won't become a big thing that some people
[Guest]: have asked me why you have put Anandi Bai on the cover.
[Guest]: Why not Rukma Bai?
[Guest]: Why is you saying that Anandi Bai is the best?
[Guest]: It's very simple.
[Guest]: There's nothing woke about this, honestly.
[Guest]: The only reason that Anandi Bai is on the cover is because we had a lot of trouble getting
[Guest]: photographs for this book.
[Guest]: I got some photographs, but they're of very poor quality and the designer said I cannot
[Guest]: make this stand out enough.
[Guest]: It's as simple as that.
[Guest]: It's nothing.
[Guest]: We're not trying to say that Anandi Bai is better than Rukma Bai by putting her on the
[Guest]: cover.
[Guest]: This photo of Anandi Bai was taken from Drexel University, which was earlier the Women's
[Guest]: Medical College.
[Guest]: And they had kept a good print.
[Amit Varma]: It's as simple as that.
[Amit Varma]: That's a pragmatic reason, but she's the first anyway.
[Guest]: So why does one even have to justify that?
[Guest]: She's the first anyway.
[Guest]: And that photograph of hers is very sort of striking, you know, that gaze of hers.
[Guest]: So any case, Rukma Bai, to my mind, is the most amazing.
[Guest]: Okay, if I had to choose one and you know, the beginning of this chapter starts with
[Guest]: men cannot in the least understand the wretchedness which we Hindu women have to endure.
[Guest]: Because you cannot enter our feelings, do not think that we are satisfied with the life
[Guest]: of drudgery that we live and that we have no taste for an aspiration after a higher
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: And Rukma Bai's entire life was aspiring to something better.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And like I said, she was from the carpenter caste, so she was from, you know, a lower
[Guest]: caste in quotes kind of thing.
[Guest]: And that also made a big difference because she had to face so much caste prejudice from
[Guest]: Tilak and the Conservatives.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So she was an amazing woman, like she, again, she had a progressive father figure, Dr. Sakaram
[Guest]: Arjun, who is a quite a famous botanist, and he was a stepfather.
[Guest]: But even he could not break the Hindu custom, which was that you have to marry all your
[Guest]: girls before like they attain puberty, otherwise you will be cursed with bad luck for generations.
[Guest]: And so she was married young to a man named Dadaji Bekaji at 11.
[Guest]: And after that, she decided that she wanted to study and she did not want to join him
[Guest]: and she kept delaying the process of joining him until finally he said, come, we have to,
[Guest]: you know, I have to assert my conjugal rights, you have given me enough trouble.
[Guest]: And Rukmabai really wanted to study and, you know, she was encouraged by her stepfather
[Guest]: and she finally filed a court case, which in those days was an amazing thing.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And she wrote two letters to the Times of India, which were anonymous, but later identity
[Guest]: was revealed.
[Guest]: And she talks at such length about the misery of women and how marriage is such a terrible
[Guest]: institution for women and a great institution for men.
[Guest]: I mean, this is what people are saying today.
[Guest]: She was so ahead of her time.
[Guest]: And she says, she writes in the first letter and she had titled it a Hindu lady.
[Guest]: So nobody knew her identity.
[Guest]: She wrote a letter to the Times of India saying marriage does not impose any inseparable obstacle
[Guest]: on men in the course of their studies.
[Guest]: If married early, they're not called upon to go to the house and to submit to the tender
[Guest]: mercies of a mother-in-law.
[Guest]: So a lot of men on Twitter and all when I was, you know, dropping hints about this book
[Guest]: or a lot of men are saying, oh no, but in those times, even when we're married early,
[Guest]: look at our prime minister, dear Modiji.
[Guest]: The point is that the men did not have to go to a mother-in-law's house and have restrictions
[Guest]: put on their education.
[Guest]: They could study even after marriage.
[Guest]: And then she says, but the case with women is a very reverse of this.
[Guest]: If the girl is married at the age of eight, her parents had liberty to send her to school
[Guest]: till she's 10.
[Guest]: But if they wish to continue her at school, they must obtain the express permission of
[Guest]: the girl's mother-in-law.
[Guest]: Thus, Mr. Editor, when we're just beginning to appreciate education, we are taken away
[Guest]: from school.
[Guest]: And I am one of those unfortunate Hindu women whose hard lot it is to suffer the miseries
[Guest]: entailed by the custom of early marriage.
[Guest]: It comes between me and that thing which I prize above all others, study and mental cultivation.
[Guest]: And then she suggested the age of marriage be raised to 15 for the bride and 20 for the
[Guest]: groom, which in those days was like, wow, radical, you know, kind of thing.
[Guest]: And like, you know, like other commenters has said, there were lots of people who condemned
[Guest]: infant marriage, but society had not progressed to the point where they condemned child marriage.
[Guest]: By 11, everybody was agreed that by 11, you should all get married kind of thing.
[Guest]: So she was amazing.
[Guest]: I mean, she went and wrote these letters, and then she got a lot of flack.
[Guest]: And then she made her powerful enemy who continued to be her lifelong enemy, Bal Gangadhar Tilak.
[Guest]: And Tilak, you know, was a conservative.
[Guest]: He always, he started out as a conservative, and he ended as a conservative.
[Guest]: And there are people who say, do not judge him by the values of today.
[Guest]: To some extent, that's true.
[Guest]: However, his contemporaries were not as conservative as him.
[Guest]: They were the amazing Phules, which, you know, I mentioned briefly, but I don't go into detail
[Guest]: because that is not the purpose of this story.
[Guest]: And the Phules had set up a school for girls some 40 years before Rakhmabai came along,
[Guest]: right, in 1848.
[Guest]: And then M. G. Ranade set up the school in Huzoorpaga Girls' School in Pune, along with
[Guest]: all Tilak's contemporaries from Pune like R. J. Bandarkar, G. G. Agarkar, G. K. Gokhale.
[Guest]: And all of these people were in support of the education of girls, and Tilak believed
[Guest]: that education should go so far and no further.
[Guest]: So again, he believed that women could not understand mathematics and science, so they
[Guest]: should be taught Sanskrit, needlework, cookery, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: And, you know, in his excerpts, his fear at women sort of rising up and overthrowing this
[Guest]: sort of, you know, Brahmin patriarchy is very clear.
[Guest]: It's very clear, you know, he just keeps saying just enough education to be good wives and
[Guest]: mothers.
[Guest]: That's enough.
[Guest]: Just, just, just enough.
[Guest]: And he really rose against Rakhmabai and he marshaled his papers, the Kesari and the Maratha,
[Guest]: and in order to vilify her, he was like, well, if we allow this, then, you know, every, he
[Guest]: was basically, Tilak believed that marriage is a sacred Hindu sacrament, and he did not
[Guest]: believe that the customs of Hindu should be interfered with by the government.
[Guest]: And it is not that he did not believe in social reform, mind you.
[Guest]: He did believe in social reform, but he thought that it should come, you know, from society
[Guest]: and it should sort of trickle down and it should come slowly and it should not be forced
[Guest]: by the British government.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And I mean, that is one view, which I frankly, you know, I do not really support.
[Guest]: And he kind of, you know, argued that she cannot leave her conjugal rights.
[Guest]: Marriage is sacred and she has to continue to be a good wife to him and all that.
[Guest]: And then eventually, you know, she went to court, Rakhmabai went to court and the lower
[Guest]: court judgment was in her favor, but the higher court judgment said that she has to either
[Guest]: go to jail for six months or go and live with her husband.
[Guest]: And she was so incredibly brave that she said, I will go to jail.
[Guest]: I'm not going to live with this dude.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So it just sort of reached a stalemate at then and, you know, Tilak got even more angry
[Guest]: and they, you know, they ran a series of scathing pieces against Rakhmabai.
[Guest]: They actually, Tilak actually compared Rakhmabai to the Shikhandi in the Mahabharata.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And this is what he says.
[Guest]: He says, even as the Pandavas tried to conquer Bhishma by putting forth Shikhandi.
[Guest]: So also the reformers have the audacity to fire bullets at our ancient religion under
[Guest]: the cover of Rakhmabai with the intention of castrating our eternal religion.
[Guest]: We agree with public opinion that government should not interfere with our customs, which
[Guest]: have been carried on in our society from time immemorial.
[Guest]: And again, they compared her to Anandi Bai.
[Guest]: They said, you know, the Kesari says Anandi Bai did not give up her own religion, proper
[Guest]: conduct as a woman, our own customs and conventions.
[Guest]: She realized that otherwise people will call her dharma brishta, fallen from religion,
[Guest]: that women from her society will not honor her.
[Guest]: As a result, she would not be able to secure the good of her sisters.
[Guest]: And the thing with Rakhmabai is with all this, like even now, I think if, you know, all these
[Guest]: people had risen up against me, I would have just quietly given up and gone away.
[Guest]: But she didn't.
[Guest]: She didn't give up.
[Guest]: And she mobilized a lot of, you know, liberal support, including from, you know, Bairam
[Guest]: Malabari and, you know, the liberals and all that.
[Guest]: And she was instrumental in bringing about the Age of Consent Act.
[Guest]: That was some years later in which they raised the age of marriage for women because people
[Guest]: realized that this is such a barbaric custom.
[Guest]: And eventually she decided to, you know, there was a lot of debate, but I think Rakhmabai
[Guest]: felt that she was becoming a bit of a political football and she arrived at some kind of settlement
[Guest]: with Dadaji and her husband.
[Guest]: And she decided to go leave the country and go and study in the London School of Medicine.
[Guest]: In this, she was helped by Edith Pichi, who was like with the Kama Hospital.
[Guest]: And you know, it's very sort of characteristic.
[Guest]: She decided that, you know, she was 24 years old and you have to note that, you know, Anandi
[Guest]: Bai and Kadamini were forged ahead of her because she was spending her life fighting
[Guest]: things in the court.
[Guest]: So she paid Dadaji 2000 rupees, which was a lot in that time.
[Guest]: And she said, I'm, you know, I'm done being your wife.
[Guest]: And immediately she left, Dadaji married again.
[Guest]: So he couldn't have been so keen on her anyway.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: He just wanted to stop her from doing stuff.
[Guest]: Dadaji married again and she went to the London School of Medicine, where she met a lot of
[Guest]: very liberal people.
[Guest]: She studied and there's very little written about her experiences there.
[Guest]: And she comes back to India.
[Guest]: She goes to Surat and she works there for years.
[Guest]: And then she eventually goes to Rajkot and she leads a very quiet life.
[Guest]: She does not perhaps want to, you know, get any press.
[Guest]: But she leads a quiet life.
[Guest]: She helps during the plague, the great plague, and she gets a medal during the great plague.
[Guest]: And she works very quietly there, not trying to draw any publicity.
[Guest]: And she remains alone, alone means, I mean, that's not the way to describe it.
[Guest]: She remains single for the rest of her life, but she's surrounded by a family of nephews,
[Guest]: nieces, peers, friends.
[Guest]: And this is why she was, I think, the most amazing.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And while talking about caste, it's very hard to find actual mentions where somebody says,
[Guest]: oh, she's a lower caste woman and therefore.
[Guest]: But it's, if you read between the lines, the constant contrast between Andibai and Rukmabai,
[Unknown]: it's always there, you know.
[Guest]: And the kind of vituperation she received from Tilak, I do not think she would have
[Guest]: received if she was from a higher caste.
[Guest]: It was all sort of reading between the lines, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, before I ask my next question on Rukmabai, I just like to make a quick comment
[Amit Varma]: on what I consider Tilak's hypocritical conservatism.
[Amit Varma]: I actually have a little bit of sympathy for conservatism, but not for the way Tilak practiced
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, as you correctly pointed out, some of his contemporaries, especially two great heroes
[Amit Varma]: of mine, Agarkar and Gokhale, were, you know, in a sense, both liberal and conservative
[Amit Varma]: in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: Like Agarkar was one of the founders of the college where I did my education, Ferguson
[Guest]: College in Pune.
[Guest]: Ferguson, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: He was the founder of the late 1890s.
[Amit Varma]: And mind you, not the late 1990s, where such a story would still be an outlier.
[Amit Varma]: But late 1890s, he was speaking with a biology class.
[Amit Varma]: And he asked this group of students there that if donkeys had a God, what would the
[Amit Varma]: God look like?
[Amit Varma]: And then he raised his hands above his ear, you know, to indicate donkey's ears.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, Ferguson was known as a hotbed of atheism in those days.
[Amit Varma]: Now, when I think back on what Agarkar and Gokhale were doing, they were changing society
[Amit Varma]: from within the right way, right?
[Amit Varma]: So I don't really buy, like, I buy the point that very often society change cannot be imposed
[Amit Varma]: from the top down.
[Amit Varma]: It has to come from within society.
[Amit Varma]: But the people I see actually doing that, other people like Agarkar and Gokhale and
[Amit Varma]: before them, their mentor, Ranade, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And the Phule's also, like, I mean, Phule himself.
[Amit Varma]: And the Phule's even before that.
[Guest]: Phule actually came out and said that women are kept uneducated by men, you know, with
[Guest]: the Hindu scriptures to kind of bludgeon them into submission.
[Amit Varma]: Those are not his words, but you know, that kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And I think in 1848, they founded the school for girls of all castes.
[Guest]: Yes, exactly.
[Guest]: All castes.
[Amit Varma]: Not just restricted.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, Tilak said in Maratha that women are, quote, incapable of understanding
[Amit Varma]: English history, mathematics and science as it interfered in the natural aspect of a woman's
[Amit Varma]: life.
[Amit Varma]: So the girls should be taught at the most Sanskrit sanitation and needlework.
[Amit Varma]: Teaching Hindu women to read English would ruin their precious traditional values and
[Amit Varma]: would make them immoral and insubordinate, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, the thing is that he is in that sense, misogynist and regressive and all this
[Amit Varma]: talk of society must change from within and not have top-down imposition.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with that principle, but he's not changing it from within.
[Guest]: Agarkar and Gokhale are changing it from within.
[Guest]: I mean, with his own daughter, Tilak's own daughter, he actually married her off only
[Guest]: at 16, which in those days was like, wow, Phule and all that, you know, but so he did
[Guest]: follow it in a limited constraints of his own family.
[Guest]: But he didn't believe in this kind of, you know, starting girls schools for everybody
[Guest]: and that word insubordinate, like, you know, that is the key word.
[Guest]: And I just feel that, you know, he saw Rukmabai as a woman from a lower caste who was a threat
[Guest]: to the whole Brahmin supremacy.
[Guest]: He thought once we open this door, women will be, because Tilak also said a lot of terrible
[Guest]: things about Ramabai and, you know, her conversion to Christianity sent him into an apocalyptic
[Guest]: fit.
[Guest]: Now, how can she do this kind of thing?
[Guest]: She's a good Pune woman and this, that and whatnot.
[Guest]: She was also from Pune, like all these people were from Pune.
[Guest]: So yes, you're absolutely right that, you know, his contemporaries and even people before
[Guest]: him like the Phule's, you know, Jyotibai and Sahitri were much, much more advanced.
[Guest]: So I don't give Tilak a free pass in this and see, this is history.
[Guest]: One can applaud Tilak for amazing bravery.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Later, and this is in his early career, later he goes on for Swaraj, for charged with sedition,
[Guest]: everything.
[Guest]: Tilak was an amazing man.
[Guest]: We do not have to say that he was amazing with regard to women.
[Guest]: We can give him just like Gandhi, right?
[Guest]: I mean, like Gandhi was an incredible man.
[Guest]: But the problem with, you know, everything these days is that everything is black and
[Amit Varma]: white.
[Guest]: Bad person, good person, bad person, good person.
[Guest]: This is not the case when you actually read history.
[Amit Varma]: The cliche on my show, which is, of course, taken from Walt Whitman's poem is that people
[Amit Varma]: contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: The one part I found really remarkable about Rukmambai, like when I got to this passage,
[Amit Varma]: I just stopped reading to just process the enormity of this is that initially when she's
[Amit Varma]: trying to, you know, get her divorce, the initial argument is that my husband can't
[Amit Varma]: support me.
[Amit Varma]: He doesn't have a house and, you know, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: These are the initial arguments.
[Amit Varma]: But then at one point, the argument changes and it changes to a much more fundamental
[Amit Varma]: issue of consent.
[Amit Varma]: And I quote from your book, quote, but even as Rukmambai was responding to these petty
[Amit Varma]: charges, she was moving firmly inexorably towards a revolutionary position, which must
[Amit Varma]: have frightened even her.
[Amit Varma]: In her reply to Dadaji's plaint, she argued that as she was too young to give consent
[Amit Varma]: to the marriage, she could not be bound by it.
[Amit Varma]: This was essentially an attack on the entire Hindu family system, the custom of child marriage
[Amit Varma]: and the concept of marriage as a sacred union.
[Amit Varma]: It was one woman against the might of the Hindu sacrament, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is sort of a very different argument from the kind of arguments, you know, Anandi
[Amit Varma]: bhai made or whatever, which were taking into account the prejudices of society, where she's
[Amit Varma]: saying, let me be free because it's good for society.
[Amit Varma]: Society needs women doctors.
[Amit Varma]: And Rukmambai is planting a foot down and saying consent.
[Guest]: Absolutely, which is why she is the greatest, because she is the rule breaker.
[Guest]: She burned all the bridges.
[Guest]: She didn't leave that bridge.
[Guest]: She started with the bridge.
[Guest]: She said she must have thought she was like, I will say that he doesn't have enough money
[Guest]: to support me and let me see if I can get along, get away with it.
[Guest]: But then she realized that Dadaji will just say that, oh, well, no, I will find some money
[Guest]: and I will support you.
[Guest]: OK, and at some point she just got up and said, I'm going to burn all my bridges.
[Guest]: I'm going to burn it all down.
[Guest]: This is amazing.
[Guest]: I mean, she was just a woman, not a privileged woman.
[Guest]: And you know, she she decided that she is going to challenge the entire Hindu sacrament.
[Guest]: I can tell you that I don't think I would be able to do it.
[Guest]: I would have just crumbled and gone away and gone and lived with that person.
[Guest]: OK, you know, I wouldn't have been able to do it.
[Guest]: And I don't think most people even now would be able to do it.
[Guest]: To do it like over, you know, in 1884 is just amazing.
[Guest]: And her whole thinking is so advanced.
[Guest]: I mean, look at this thing that she has written in one of her letters.
[Guest]: Being men, the shastric lawgivers have painted themselves noble and pure and have laid every
[Guest]: conceivable sin and impurity at our door, our meaning women.
[Guest]: If these worthies are to be trusted, we are a set of unclean animals created by God for
[Guest]: the special service and gratification of man, who by divine right can treat or maltreat
[Guest]: us at his sweet will.
[Guest]: And you know, I had a question the other day when somebody asked me, do you think these
[Guest]: women were feminists?
[Guest]: I say, without exception, they were all feminists.
[Guest]: Maybe they don't fit your definition of a feminist because feminism has evolved into
[Guest]: third and fourth with feminism.
[Guest]: But just for her to have these advanced views to challenge the shastras is amazing.
[Guest]: And you're right that Anandi Bai decided that she wouldn't change.
[Guest]: Anandi Bai had some rumblings and was uneasy about the way Hindu women were treated.
[Guest]: But she kept those to her letters.
[Guest]: Meanwhile, Rukmabai went out and wrote a public letter and wandered around saying these things,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: And, you know, I sometimes I wonder how she even survived.
[Guest]: I mean, how she was not killed or harassed or physically assaulted.
[Guest]: I mean, she was harassed, but she was not physically assaulted.
[Guest]: So it's just amazing.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, and absolutely a feminist and more than that also, because she's not just fighting
[Amit Varma]: for a right for a divorce or to further education.
[Amit Varma]: She's just questioning the whole frickin edifice of values on which that society is built and
[Amit Varma]: saying all of you are full of shit.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, they were.
[Amit Varma]: And she was right.
[Amit Varma]: But to say it like, my God, that's and what indicates that also is that, you know, her
[Amit Varma]: final court case judgment was in March 1887.
[Amit Varma]: But in 1885, she actually won the first case where the judge, Robert Piher, ruled in her
[Amit Varma]: favor.
[Amit Varma]: And you write in your book, quote, when Dadaji's counsel, Dadaji is her husband, just to remind
[Amit Varma]: the listeners, when Dadaji's counsel pleaded for cause, Piher left the court in no doubt
[Amit Varma]: about his leaning, chastising the plaintiff for trying to recover an unwilling young lady
[Amit Varma]: as if she were a bullock or a cow, stop quote, last few words were his.
[Amit Varma]: And then in Maratha, you write about the Maratha argument where you say, quote, the Maratha
[Amit Varma]: argument that the Maratha argued that the Hindu marriage was a contract and Dadaji had
[Guest]: incurred a heavy loss on the marriage.
[Amit Varma]: Non-restoration of his conjugal rights was a dead loss to him.
[Amit Varma]: Who is to reimburse him for the pecuniary loss he has suffered, it asked, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And again, classic illustration of how women are just a property of men.
[Amit Varma]: It's taken as granted.
[Amit Varma]: It's a premise.
[Guest]: Yeah, this is so like, you know, revelatory by the Maratha.
[Guest]: But who will, you know, compensate Dadaji, he has bought this wife and he has now spent
[Guest]: so much money on her, kya karo?
[Guest]: And you know, it's like, it's just amazing that she had this thing to kind of, you know,
[Guest]: challenge this.
[Guest]: And you know, the Kaisari Hind also, which is like a Gujarati weekly in Bombay, it wrote,
[Guest]: millions of Hindu girls married in their infancy may with impunity break the sacred matrimonial
[Guest]: bond.
[Guest]: And this is absolutely right.
[Guest]: I mean, once basically Hindu men were scared because they knew that their child brides
[Guest]: with them only because they have no choice in the matter and they have been delivered
[Guest]: to them like a package, you know, like the cow that they own.
[Guest]: And they were suddenly there was panic.
[Guest]: I mean, I obviously I had, you know, word limitations.
[Guest]: But if you can imagine the atmosphere, then, you know, all these papers flying back and
[Guest]: forth saying Hindu women now say they will leave their wives and all the men saying,
[Guest]: oh my God, my wife is going to leave me.
[Guest]: And then who will find me, who will wash my clothes and who will cook and who will provide
[Guest]: me with sex on a tap and all that kind of thing.
[Guest]: So it's just, it's just amazing that she had the guts to stand up and say this.
[Guest]: I'm constantly lost, you know, I mean, at a certain point, I also feel like I cannot
[Guest]: go on kind of praising these women.
[Guest]: I mean, just read for yourself and you will know.
[Guest]: But she really like even this, I have quoted this academic called Sudhir Chandra and I
[Guest]: have tried not to quote too many academics because I do not want this to be an academic
[Guest]: book.
[Guest]: But he says extraordinary by any reckoning, Rukmabai's defiance is even more impressive
[Guest]: because it was made before passive resistance had captured political theory or popular imagination.
[Guest]: So she said, I will go to jail, which really shocked people.
[Guest]: They're like, what?
[Guest]: You'll go to jail?
[Guest]: She said, yeah, I'll go to jail.
[Guest]: I'm not going to pay any fine.
[Guest]: And this was before, like, you know, Gandhi made, you know, passive resistance and, you
[Guest]: know, the Ahimsa and Satyagraha and all that popular.
[Guest]: So it was at a time where, you know, people just didn't understand these concepts at all.
[Guest]: And she came out and she just broke every rule.
[Guest]: And I'm glad that she remained, you know, single and had the freedom to lead what seems
[Amit Varma]: to have been a very happy life.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, she even you refer to how she started a women's group back in the day and, you know,
[Guest]: the sisterhood of women, as it were.
[Guest]: She started women's groups and in those days, women were not allowed to go to groups.
[Guest]: So she made it a religious group so that they could all say we are here to sing bhajans.
[Guest]: But inside they were subversively doing things like, you know, trying to figure out what
[Guest]: jobs they can get, how they can make their own money by making chutneys and stitching
[Guest]: and, you know, and they would read newspapers.
[Guest]: So she, I'm really glad that she led this amazing life because, you know, other women
[Guest]: didn't have that, Himabati never led a happy life, but Rukmabai, I think, ended her life
[Guest]: happy and independent and, you know, really sort of self-sufficient, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Remarkable.
[Amit Varma]: Before we move on to the next hero of the book, Anandi bhai's husband, Gopal Rao, wrote
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, when this court case happened and the ruling went against her, he wrote
[Amit Varma]: quote, we don't want your marriage system, we don't want your divorce, we don't want
[Amit Varma]: your swindles and frauds, keep them all to yourselves, we don't envy you, but don't
[Amit Varma]: condemn our child marriage system and call us by hard names, stop quote, which is almost
[Amit Varma]: representative, I think, of the conventional view at that time, like you pointed out that
[Amit Varma]: men are just so threatened.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: I mean, you see the chasm that Rukmabai kind of prompted in Hindu society, you know, even
[Guest]: people like Anandi bhai who were sort of progressive, they looked upon, we don't have any evidence
[Guest]: of what Anandi bhai thought about Rukmabai, but her husband certainly thought that she
[Guest]: was like, you know, you know, real, you know, absolutely out of control and should be condemned
[Unknown]: in the worst possible terms.
[Guest]: So he just sort of, like I say, she sort of lit a grenade against the Hindu society, like
[Guest]: boom, it went off and everybody was like, what do you mean?
[Guest]: How can you?
[Guest]: I mean, even women must have found her too much.
[Guest]: Because when she went to the UK, there is a passage by Cornelia Swarabji, who ran into
[Guest]: Rukmabai.
[Guest]: So Swarabji was the first Indian woman lawyer and she was very privileged and, you know,
[Guest]: she was half white and all that.
[Guest]: And she also found Rukmabai a little too much and she's had some nasty things to say about
[Guest]: her.
[Guest]: She said, Rukmabai is wandering the streets with some youth from Kolhapur.
[Guest]: So this is what comes of, you know, breaking loose from proper restraint.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So Rukmabai clearly had a male friend there, though she doesn't mention him later.
[Guest]: So people thought of her as, oh, you know, she's a attention grabber and that kind of
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: And later Cornelia changed her mind about Rukmabai, perhaps because she saw that, you
[Guest]: know, she was working hard and all that.
[Guest]: And actually then Rukmabai also sort of started deciding to lead a very quiet life.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, but that early fight which she showed was mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I just think of the current time that even in current times, nobody would do this.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, for people who are against, say, Hindutva, right, the political correct
[Amit Varma]: line is that Hindutva is different from Hinduism, right, and you have to see them as different
[Amit Varma]: things and Hinduism is fine.
[Amit Varma]: And I suspect if Rukmabai was around today, she would say, no, no, they are both bad.
[Guest]: They're both equally wrong.
[Guest]: Correct.
[Guest]: I mean, none of us have the, many of us don't have the courage to say it because we're like,
[Amit Varma]: well, who will end up at my doorstep tomorrow and kill me.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, yeah.
[Unknown]: Just remarkable.
[Amit Varma]: We could talk about her forever.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about the next lady who is also so remarkable in a way, Hemabati Sen and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and you start your chapter with a couple of striking lines, which I want to
[Amit Varma]: quote, where you say, quote, married at 9 to a 45 year old, widowed at 12, deserted
[Amit Varma]: by her family, denied an education, left in grinding poverty, Hemabati Sen's early life
[Amit Varma]: was not so different to that of many Indian women, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I find this very revelatory in the sense that this is a template.
[Amit Varma]: You're married young, you're often widowed and that's it.
[Amit Varma]: And once you're widowed, you're gone.
[Amit Varma]: No one gives a shit about you.
[Amit Varma]: And in her case, there were more deaths.
[Amit Varma]: You know, her father, mother, mother-in-law, they all died at 12.
[Amit Varma]: She was penniless and without family.
[Amit Varma]: And from there, she goes on to become a doctor and become what she is.
[Guest]: So tell me a little bit about her journey.
[Guest]: See I titled my chapter about Hemabati as the fighter, because I honestly feel like
[Guest]: I say in this book that she would fight and she would mostly fight alone.
[Guest]: Like even Rukmabai had some support from liberals and from liberals in the UK and Hemabati just
[Guest]: had nobody.
[Guest]: This is my entire feeling of reading her is that this sense of absolute loneliness, which
[Guest]: may be why I identify with her so much, because I have been lonely and alone in my time.
[Guest]: I have been away from my family and with no support.
[Guest]: I just got on with it.
[Guest]: I'm not trying to exactly compare my situation to as I had lots and lots of I was never hungry
[Guest]: or anything like that.
[Guest]: But she was like, you know, she did everything alone and she did not even go to a respected
[Guest]: medical school, unlike say Kadambini or, you know, some of the others.
[Guest]: And as I said earlier, I might have to repeat myself, we know about her life because of
[Guest]: her memoir in Bengali, Because I'm a Woman, which is a long lost treasure that was only
[Guest]: discovered and translated very recently.
[Guest]: It is a searing, candid and bitter account of the life of a woman in a man's world.
[Guest]: She's very bitter and she's not trying to be cheery and saying, oh, let me look at the
[Guest]: positive.
[Guest]: She's unashamedly negative.
[Guest]: So she's like amazingly blunt about, you know, these double standards of men and women in
[Guest]: Hinduism.
[Guest]: She calls out her husband for domestic abuse.
[Guest]: She shames her family for abandoning her.
[Guest]: She flays Hinduism for its treatment of widows.
[Guest]: And like you said, this memoir lay in a trunk forgotten for some 80 years or after her death
[Guest]: and was discovered only in 2011.
[Guest]: So Hemabati had a privileged birth.
[Guest]: She was born in a Kayasth family.
[Guest]: And if you know anything about Bengal, that Kayasth are fairly privileged.
[Guest]: And she was born in a very wealthy family and her father was encouraging of her desire
[Guest]: to study.
[Guest]: But as many men were at the time, could not defy social pressure.
[Guest]: She was married off at nine to some kind of, you know, 45 year old.
[Guest]: And she writes the most, I mean, this part is very, very sad.
[Guest]: My husband read it and he's like, I can't read anymore.
[Guest]: It's making me cry and all that kind of thing.
[Guest]: So he identifies with this because he's also from rural Bengal.
[Guest]: He knows all these villages.
[Guest]: He grew up there.
[Guest]: So she basically is married to this, you know, 45 year old widower whose children are the
[Guest]: same age as her.
[Guest]: And she writes this most heartrending sort of passage about during the day she'll play
[Guest]: with dolls with her husband's daughters.
[Guest]: So her stepdaughter, she would play with dolls and at night she would make these excuses
[Guest]: to avoid her husband's advances in the night.
[Guest]: And she says, I would just forget myself and I wouldn't know what was going on.
[Guest]: And then I would wake up and I would find myself without my clothes and all that kind
[Guest]: of thing.
[Guest]: And she was completely traumatized by this.
[Guest]: And Hemabati's husband would also bring home prostitutes.
[Guest]: And there's one passage which is so depressing.
[Guest]: She writes in her memoir and she's written all this in her own words.
[Guest]: One night, the woman her husband brought home scolded him for having sex in front of his
[Guest]: sheltered young child bride.
[Guest]: How else will she learn, responded the unrepentant husband.
[Guest]: And she was nine at this age.
[Guest]: And so this was like really depressing.
[Guest]: And then her father was completely helpless.
[Guest]: She would make trips to her father's house, but eventually her father would have to send
[Guest]: her back.
[Guest]: She was so traumatized that she would cry and faint and collapse.
[Guest]: And her mother summoned an exorcist.
[Guest]: And her father says these words, spirit possession indeed.
[Guest]: Because of your pestering, I threw her into deep water with her hands and feet tied before
[Guest]: she had grown up.
[Guest]: Now if she dies, let her.
[Guest]: I shall not do anything about it.
[Guest]: Let her die.
[Guest]: She will suffer a lot more if she survives.
[Guest]: I think basically it's a sort of a never before recorded picture of the manner in which child
[Guest]: marriage is trapped.
[Guest]: Even the most progressive families like her father.
[Guest]: And I'm sure all this must be much better than the original Bangla.
[Guest]: If any listeners can read Bangla, I cannot.
[Guest]: And I mean, my husband can, but it's just too much for him to translate the whole thing
[Guest]: into English.
[Guest]: It's like too long.
[Guest]: But just read it if you can in the original Bangla.
[Guest]: So eventually her husband dies and she is a widow.
[Guest]: She's penniless.
[Guest]: She has her parents, her father takes her back.
[Guest]: But she is, you know, sort of a burden kind of thing.
[Guest]: And she says, shame on you Hindu society, a girl of 10 has to pay for the marriage of
[Guest]: an old man of 50.
[Guest]: If I needed a single paisa, I would have to beg it from others.
[Guest]: What about my husband?
[Guest]: He had taken a third wife and cut a child's throat.
[Guest]: I mean, not literally, but he has, you know, metaphorically cut her throat.
[Guest]: What provision have you made?
[Guest]: So she completely lays a husband because he made no sort of provision for her.
[Guest]: She goes back to her family and, you know, eventually her father dies, her mother-in-law
[Guest]: dies, her mother dies and she's left with no money.
[Guest]: Her brother takes away all her money.
[Guest]: Sometimes when I think about, you know, the glorification of this Indian family, I feel
[Guest]: like, yeah, well, it really wasn't like that for many people.
[Guest]: So, you know, and she has to support herself.
[Guest]: And this was just around the time that, you know, Kadambini and all were becoming lady
[Guest]: doctors and Hemabati becomes involved with the Brahmo movement.
[Guest]: And she realizes that this, by being a Brahmo, she can get some freedom and she decides to
[Guest]: become a doctor.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Sorry.
[Guest]: Before that, she decides to marry again.
[Guest]: She is in Benares for many years as a widow and she has a really tough time even there.
[Guest]: I mean, there's this passage where she does not want to ask for help from anybody.
[Guest]: She says, I would buy a pice worth of wood and cook three handfuls of rice with salt.
[Guest]: That was all I ate.
[Guest]: I did not eat anything at night.
[Guest]: If anyone asked me, I would say, as a widow, I cook but once a day.
[Guest]: When people heard this, they concluded I ate nothing but rice in accordance with the requirements
[Guest]: of a spiritual life.
[Guest]: I decided there was no point in letting people know my actual situation.
[Guest]: Why should I announce my poverty when no one would help me?
[Guest]: So she never asked for help.
[Guest]: She never announced her poverty because she knew she would not be helped as a Bengali
[Guest]: child widow.
[Guest]: And this just shows this whole sort of, you know, oh, you know, fantastic Indian culture
[Guest]: kind of thing.
[Guest]: In actual fact, widows at that time were treated so badly.
[Guest]: And people would say, oh, you know, widows don't eat any fish and they don't eat any
[Guest]: dal because, you know, they're ascetic and they're leading a Spartan life and they want
[Guest]: to, you know, keep themselves away from, you know, carnal desires.
[Guest]: That whole concept in Bengali culture, right?
[Guest]: You have to, widows have to eat only vegetables and, you know, lead a very sort of Spartan
[Guest]: life.
[Guest]: But that is the real reason sometimes I think was perhaps because they just couldn't afford
[Guest]: it and they were all sitting in Benares and Varanasi and, you know, sort of kind of suffering.
[Guest]: So she was alone and poor for many years and then she decides to marry again and she marries
[Guest]: a man called Kunja Behri who pretends to be very spiritual and interested in social service
[Guest]: and that kind of thing.
[Guest]: And she gets taken in by this act and she is also feeling lonely and she feels like
[Guest]: she doesn't want to be constantly begging strangers.
[Guest]: So after they are married, he turns out to be a complete waste of space.
[Guest]: He is only interested in going for spiritual trips in the Himalayas and, you know, working
[Guest]: with the Brahmo Samaj for zero pay.
[Guest]: So Hemabati is driven into becoming what is called a VLMS, Vernacular Licentiate in Medicine
[Guest]: and Surgery.
[Guest]: And she decides to join the Campbell Medical School, which was training women who were
[Guest]: not really doctors, women who didn't have much of an education like Hemabati, but they
[Guest]: were training them to work in rural areas to provide some kind of medical treatment.
[Guest]: And this was in partnership with the Dufferin Fund.
[Guest]: So she decided to join that simply in order to make money.
[Guest]: There was, there seems to be no other sort of motivation for her.
[Guest]: She just decides that she's going to do this, okay, and she does well at it.
[Guest]: She wins a scholarship, she wins a gold medal and she writes that her teachers were kind
[Guest]: to her and there were other women all from very poor backgrounds, you know, including
[Guest]: Muslim women and, you know, really, really poor women.
[Guest]: And she does her training, which is not that kind of training that you would get in a good
[Guest]: medical college.
[Guest]: It's sort of like a half-baked training, but she does it.
[Guest]: And like I said earlier, she wins a gold medal.
[Guest]: And I have to read that chapter because that's the most striking chapter.
[Guest]: Hemabati stood first in the examination with a boy called Gopal Chandra Dutta.
[Guest]: But then hell broke loose.
[Guest]: The gold medal was to go to Hemabati, but the boys protested.
[Guest]: The gold medal prize began long before they were girl students.
[Guest]: If it is given to a girl, the boys will go on strike, they argued.
[Guest]: When Mr. Gibbons, the superintendent of the college, stood firm, the boys went on strike.
[Guest]: Some said, why don't we kill that girl?
[Guest]: The girl is Hemabati.
[Guest]: That would be the end of the matter.
[Guest]: It's a great mistake to pamper women.
[Guest]: For the week, the boys formed pickets, overthrown benches and threw bricks and stones at the
[Guest]: women students.
[Guest]: So, you know, the men were so afraid of the women and the competition.
[Guest]: So eventually Hemabati is summoned by the lieutenant governor of Bengal and he says
[Guest]: they try to strike a bargain with her and say, suppose we give the gold medal to the
[Guest]: boys.
[Guest]: What will you do?
[Guest]: And she's like, I don't need a gold medal.
[Guest]: I just want money because I have a newborn baby.
[Guest]: She had by that time, she had already had children.
[Guest]: So just give me some money and they increase a scholarship amount.
[Guest]: And they give her a silver medal.
[Guest]: They take away the gold and give it to some boy.
[Guest]: And she's very practical.
[Guest]: She says, I don't want any gold medal.
[Guest]: I just want money.
[Guest]: And after that, you know, she works on her own and she has more children.
[Guest]: Her husband continues being a terrible person.
[Guest]: And she writes so much detail about the sexual harassment that she faced and the harassment
[Guest]: she faced and how she was paid less by the men.
[Guest]: It's an amazing memoir of a working woman's life at that point and the constant harassment
[Guest]: she faced and her problems with juggling her children.
[Guest]: By that time, she had almost five children and eventually, you know, her husband passes
[Guest]: away.
[Guest]: And then she's sort of free and she decides to look after poor children and she takes
[Guest]: in a number of orphaned children of every religion.
[Guest]: And in her estimate, she cared for an astonishing 485 children.
[Guest]: That seems like quite high.
[Guest]: She may have overestimated, but it's not all at once.
[Guest]: It was sort of like she would take five or ten or six and then they would leave and find
[Guest]: some homes or they would grow up.
[Guest]: She would take another five and she lived for 31 years after the death of her husband.
[Guest]: But sadly, she never seems to have been very happy.
[Guest]: I don't think she had a very happy family life.
[Guest]: I don't think she was well treated by her family.
[Guest]: It is also possible that she was not a very easy person to live with.
[Guest]: So that was the end of Himabati and like I said before, like, you know, she sort of became
[Guest]: almost like a male in many ways, you know, she sort of gave up on emotion and she just
[Guest]: got the job done.
[Guest]: Actually, that sounds very sexist.
[Guest]: I don't mean that women don't get the job done.
[Amit Varma]: What I mean is that this was considered a male attribute and she kind of, you know,
[Guest]: yes, and she was a little detached from everything.
[Guest]: She didn't spend much time, you know, thinking about the, you know, the future, this that
[Guest]: she just sort of kept paddling, you know, to stay afloat.
[Guest]: Okay, I've gone on for a long time.
[Guest]: That answer was a bit too long.
[Amit Varma]: I was just trying to sum her up.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic answer.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that you did with your answer is that a lot of the parts that you
[Amit Varma]: read out are parts that I had myself copy pasted into my notes because I thought they
[Amit Varma]: are so indicative.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, you mentioned the privilege of, you know, being a Kayasth girl and all
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought just to give some context, I love this paragraph from your book also where
[Amit Varma]: you write, quote, With most Kulin Kayasth brides being 30 years younger than their husbands,
[Amit Varma]: a new child bride could expect in most cases to soon be a child widow.
[Amit Varma]: A widow would be shunned and mistreated at best and raped or abused at worst.
[Amit Varma]: They would have their head shorn, wear only white for the rest of their life and live
[Amit Varma]: in crushing poverty.
[Amit Varma]: Many would be denied claims to their husband's properties and turned to prostitution to survive.
[Amit Varma]: In 1853, it was estimated that Calcutta had a population of 12,718 prostitutes, many of
[Amit Varma]: them child widows.
[Amit Varma]: And in her battle, you know, you've got so many great details in your chapter about her
[Amit Varma]: battle.
[Amit Varma]: For example, the intimidation she went through, you know, the windows and doors of her house
[Amit Varma]: would be sprinkled with feces to sort of intimidate her.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, two men slunk into her house and one of them was associated with one of
[Amit Varma]: her enemies called Badrinath Mukherjee, who wanted to kill her, which is striking.
[Amit Varma]: And also there is in something that she says is also a connection to what you said earlier.
[Amit Varma]: When you gave advice to young people that no matter how, you know, busy you might be
[Amit Varma]: with, you know, looking after family or whatever, make a couple of hours in the morning, make
[Amit Varma]: half an hour somewhere, do some writing.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point she is writing about a friend of hers, a Christian friend who was also a
[Amit Varma]: doctor who stopped working after marriage.
[Amit Varma]: And you write, quote, Himmabhati was furious about the waste of talent and brains and remarked
[Amit Varma]: that even if a friend had worked two hours a day for the welfare of the people, it would
[Amit Varma]: have done her a lot of good.
[Amit Varma]: And now she speaks, I would be incapable of adjusting to such a life.
[Amit Varma]: I could not forget myself, forget God, give up my work and find peace in a few ornaments
[Amit Varma]: and fine clothes, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you quote Indrani Sen, where I think she sums up beautifully what, why Himmabhati was
[Amit Varma]: so remarkable given the times.
[Amit Varma]: And Sen writes, quote, first, she was a literate woman in an age where female literacy was
[Amit Varma]: taboo.
[Amit Varma]: Second, she was the child widow who remarried with no family support at the age of 23.
[Amit Varma]: Third, she went through great difficulties and even dangers in her passion for learning.
[Amit Varma]: And lastly, she became a lady doctor and managed both the ghar and bahar, home and outside
[Amit Varma]: in her life.
[Amit Varma]: In all this, she displayed a female subjectivity, which was a driving force of her life, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you kind of imagine how many other memoirs are unwritten and how many other written memoirs
[Amit Varma]: are lost inside the trunk where they are put, you know, so it's such a fortuitous thing
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And she was, I think, possibly the few who actually continue to have memoir to the end
[Guest]: of her life.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: She didn't stop when she got married and, you know, she just kept writing properly because
[Guest]: it was a release from her and she would curse her husband out nicely in the pages.
[Guest]: You know, it was like that.
[Amit Varma]: That was what she was doing.
[Amit Varma]: And Hindu society.
[Guest]: In fact, Hindu society, her children, by the end, she's cursing her children also, poor
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: Sometimes I feel like she never had any sort of, you know, affection.
[Guest]: And at the other side, I also feel perhaps she might have been very difficult to live
[Guest]: with.
[Guest]: Sometimes these people who are great in the outside world are just very difficult to live
[Guest]: with, you know, inside, you know, must be that.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, so we have two more lady doctors to go through, but I have taken up so much
[Amit Varma]: of your time, but, you know, Muthulakshmi Reddy and Mary Poonen-Lukos are also such
[Amit Varma]: inspiring figures.
[Amit Varma]: So I urge everyone to just buy the book.
[Amit Varma]: It's an essential book in many ways and extremely readable.
[Amit Varma]: So I won't ask you to elaborate on detail on them as we're kind of running out of time,
[Amit Varma]: but I will ask you a final question.
[Amit Varma]: And for this, I'll go back to something we started the episode with, where I quoted from
[Amit Varma]: the article you wrote about your parents' memories of Iran, about, you know, pre-revolution,
[Amit Varma]: there are all these women and all this fine fashion and everything seems free and post-revolution,
[Amit Varma]: all of it changes.
[Amit Varma]: And that's interesting because suddenly you see a society going backwards.
[Amit Varma]: Like we often assume that, hey, the arc of history bends towards a better place, whether
[Amit Varma]: you call it justice or freedom or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: You think that it will go up and down, but the arc of history bends towards a better
[Amit Varma]: place.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, that didn't happen in Iran.
[Amit Varma]: It was a big shift that happened.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, some wonderful Iranian cinema and art has emerged after that.
[Amit Varma]: But by and large, I think the society suffered.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, thinking of the current day where, you know, you and I both kind of agreed
[Amit Varma]: that some of the things that Rukmabai said is not something that people would have the
[Amit Varma]: courage to say today, in a sense, there is a regressive strain in our society, which
[Amit Varma]: is reasserting itself.
[Amit Varma]: And it has, you know, got into our politics as well.
[Amit Varma]: In many ways, it seems like we are becoming less liberal, you know, and being someone
[Amit Varma]: who has some distance and objectivity from this also, because you have lived all over
[Amit Varma]: the world, you've seen other societies, you've been in the thick of things like first in
[Amit Varma]: Iran.
[Amit Varma]: You had mentioned you were in Istanbul as well, in 2012, when there were those sort
[Amit Varma]: of the uprising against Erdogan.
[Amit Varma]: You've seen a lot of this turmoil and also you have some distance from India.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something that worries you, that it is not necessary that we will just progress
[Amit Varma]: in a better direction, that things can go backwards, that many of the fights these remarkable
[Amit Varma]: women fought to win were not won, either by them perhaps for not fully won.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, even by society, that it's still stark that many of their sort of laments
[Amit Varma]: still hold true for so many people.
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: So to begin with, you know, let me apologize.
[Guest]: I think the reason why we don't have time is because I've rambled on.
[Unknown]: No, no, no.
[Unknown]: This was wonderful.
[Guest]: No, there is really no other reason.
[Guest]: I should have been a little more precise and looked at the time, but I just went on and
[Amit Varma]: on jabbering.
[Amit Varma]: I'm very glad and Twitter will disagree with you on this.
[Amit Varma]: Mark my words.
[Amit Varma]: Let me stack Kavita and tell her what a great conversation this was.
[Guest]: I'm afraid that we can't go into Muthulakshmi and Mary with like such a lot of detail.
[Guest]: So in answer to your question, I've been really back and forth on this.
[Guest]: I'm very muddled in my thoughts on whether we are getting worse, better, worse, better.
[Guest]: And you know, when I think of how much my grandparents, which are quite recent, how
[Guest]: much they suffered, like they didn't have any education, they were married at nine.
[Guest]: And here I am, I have a daughter.
[Guest]: So I'm very interested in these things and you know, I have married outside the community.
[Guest]: So I have kind of sort of left, stepped out of society.
[Guest]: She can marry whomever she wants.
[Guest]: She is educating herself in a discipline which is not engineering and not medicine and will
[Guest]: not lead to an easy job.
[Guest]: So until a long time, I thought that my daughter had a much better life than me.
[Guest]: And I was like very smug in this sort of thing.
[Guest]: Now I'm beginning to slowly change my mind.
[Guest]: One, as you say, things just seem so communal and I'm really worried because I'm from, you
[Guest]: know, South Canada, Dakshinakhandita, so Udupi and all that side.
[Guest]: And you know, I used to visit my grandmother, my aunts in that region.
[Guest]: And I'm not saying that they are so progressive or anything.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that.
[Guest]: But what I am saying is that they had friends from all communities.
[Guest]: Yes, they may not have married a Christian because Mangalore is full of, Udupi is full
[Guest]: of Christian people.
[Guest]: They may not, they wouldn't have married a Christian.
[Guest]: So yes, we cannot say that they were progressive, but they were great friends with them.
[Guest]: They would call them home and, you know, they would work with them, you know, and also with
[Guest]: Muslims and Dakshinakhandita has always had, you know, they've had Hindus, they have had
[Guest]: Muslims, they've had Christians all working together.
[Guest]: And now I'm seeing all these reports of these, you know, people from right-wing groups beating
[Guest]: up, you know, people who dare to mix and mingle with people from opposite religions.
[Guest]: And I just find that so disturbing.
[Guest]: And my kids are in a bubble, okay.
[Guest]: Even before I moved here, when I was in Bangalore, we were leading that sort of typical software
[Guest]: Bangalore life where their schools were very sort of had people from different communities,
[Guest]: but that is their posh schools.
[Guest]: What's happening on the ground is something completely different.
[Guest]: So they're in a bubble in that way.
[Guest]: And if I say to them, oh, you know, somebody has beaten up X and Y because one was a Muslim
[Guest]: and one was a Hindu, they'll be like, what?
[Guest]: I mean, they know it happens, but they can't identify with that sort of sentiment.
[Guest]: And I'm just very worried about that.
[Guest]: I'm also very, very worried about the way that journalists are being attacked for doing
[Guest]: their job, the curbs on freedom of expression, the laws that are, you know, opening up the
[Guest]: country to, you know, unbridled sort of expansion by, you know, corporates.
[Guest]: And I'm afraid that COVID has made me a complete pessimist.
[Guest]: Before that, I was like, you know, puttling along.
[Guest]: And now I just feel very, very, very sad for India because things are, you know, and people
[Guest]: may get the impression listening to me that, oh, well, what's your problem?
[Guest]: You have escaped.
[Guest]: I have not because I plan to return to India because at some point, because at some point,
[Guest]: I'm going to have to look after my family and with COVID, my mother and with COVID times,
[Guest]: it's going to be extremely difficult to do it.
[Guest]: I can't keep whizzing back and forth.
[Guest]: So I do plan to return to India plus as, you know, just very selfishly, India is the cheapest
[Guest]: place to retire in.
[Guest]: And you know, we are all approaching retirement age, it's the cheapest place to retire in.
[Guest]: So I do plan to return, I will have the same problems as anyone else, okay.
[Guest]: I'm not planning to live permanently in the UK.
[Guest]: It doesn't really make sense from my point of view, and it's just too expensive.
[Guest]: So I have a very now after COVID and the way it's been handled and, you know, and the way,
[Guest]: you know, the poor have suffered and the rich, including me have got vaccines, I'm just become
[Guest]: very pessimistic.
[Guest]: So I don't know, I don't, I don't feel very optimistic, maybe I mean, there is a tie to
[Guest]: these things, maybe it will come back, like, you know, we remember how depressed we felt
[Guest]: about the US and then suddenly Biden came along.
[Guest]: So I hope something like that happens and we move away from this terrible sort of communalism,
[Guest]: right wing conservatism, all of these things that are, you know, Hindutva sort of thing
[Guest]: that is gripping the nation.
[Guest]: I don't talk about much of this on my social media, I'm not very political in my social
[Guest]: media.
[Guest]: It is not because I'm apolitical, I'm not.
[Guest]: It's just that once you start talking about these things, you never end.
[Guest]: I mean, it's just becomes like a full time job and I have other things to do with my
[Guest]: life.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, yeah, I mean, where do you stop?
[Amit Varma]: But I must at this point say that why are you, how dare you speak of retirement?
[Amit Varma]: You can retire after 40 years, you just spoke about your mother learning sitar at the age
[Amit Varma]: of 75.
[Amit Varma]: Something that I'm going to remember because it's so inspiring for me also.
[Guest]: No, true.
[Guest]: I when I say retire, I think my husband will retire from this serious corporate slavery
[Guest]: job, because he's tired poor guy.
[Guest]: And I think I will continue doing some writing or I mean, to be honest, I am not sure I want
[Guest]: to write more books.
[Guest]: I think my next venture would be something to do with people.
[Guest]: I'm feeling very interested in meeting people again after being stuck inside in a pandemic.
[Guest]: I think I want to do some kind of people facing thing, but I'm not sure what it will be.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you know, you've given me so much of your time and so many of your insights.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you so much for this.
[Amit Varma]: And also thank you so much for your wonderful book and Godspeed and whatever you choose
[Guest]: to do from now on.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: Thank you for letting me talk about my entire journey.
[Guest]: I mean, I sort of said yes to this.
[Guest]: I was like, I only want to talk about my book.
[Guest]: I don't want to talk about myself at all.
[Guest]: But I think I changed my mind along the way and possibly talk too much about myself.
[Guest]: So let's, let's see.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online
[Amit Varma]: or offline and buy Lady Doctors, the untold stories of India's first women in medicine
[Amit Varma]: by Kavita Rao.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Kavita on Twitter at Kavita Rao.
[Amit Varma]: That's one word.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and The Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep
[Amit Varma]: this podcast alive and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.